[]

[This issue of Peking Review is from massline.org. Massline.org has
kindly given us permission to to place these documents on the MIA. We
made only some formatting changes to make them congruent with our style
sheets. Note from massline.org: This article is reprinted from Peking
Review, Volume 9, #33, Aug. 12, 1966, pp. 6-11. Thanks are due to the
WWW.WENGEWANG.ORG web site for some of the work done for this posting.
Special note: There are 2 very slightly different versions of this
document, apparently from different English-language editions of PR. The
version below mostly follows the North American edition, but capitalizes
the first letters of “Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution” in
accordance with a different English-language edition.]



DECISION OF THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF THE CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY CONCERNING THE GREAT PROLETARIAN CULTURAL REVOLUTION


(Adopted on August 8, 1966)

A New Stage in the Socialist Revolution

      The Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution now unfolding is a great
revolution that touches people to their very souls and constitutes a new
stage in the development of the socialist revolution in our country, a
stage which is both broader and deeper.

      At the Tenth Plenary Session of the Eighth Central Committee of
the Party, Comrade Mao Tse-tung said: to overthrow a political power, it
is always necessary first of all to create public opinion, to do work in
the ideological sphere. This is true for the revolutionary class as well
as for the counter-revolutionary class. This thesis of Comrade Mao
Tse-tung’s has been proved entirely correct in practice.

      Although the bourgeoisie has been overthrown, it is still trying
to use the old ideas, culture, customs and habits of the exploiting
classes to corrupt the masses, capture their minds and endeavour to
stage a comeback. The proletariat must do the exact opposite: it must
meet head-on every challenge of the bourgeoisie in the ideological field
and use the new ideas, culture, customs and habits of the proletariat to
change the mental outlook of the whole of society. At present, our
objective is to struggle against and overthrow those persons in
authority who are taking the capitalist road, to criticize and repudiate
the reactionary bourgeois academic “authorities” and the ideology of the
bourgeoisie and all other exploiting classes and to transform education,
literature and art and all other parts of the superstructure not in
correspondence with the socialist economic base, so as to facilitate the
consolidation and development of the socialist system.

2  The Main Current and the Zigzags

      The masses of the workers, peasants, soldiers, revolutionary
intellectuals, and revolutionary cadres form the main force in this
Great Cultural Revolution. Large numbers of revolutionary young people,
previously unknown, have become courageous and daring pathbreakers. They
are vigorous in action and intelligent. Through the media of
big-character posters and great debates, they argue things out, expose
and criticize thoroughly, and launch resolute attacks on the open and
hidden representatives of the bourgeoisie. In such a great revolutionary
movement, it is hardly avoidable that they should show shortcomings of
one kind or another; however, their general revolutionary orientation
has been correct from the beginning. This is the main current in the
Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution. It is the general direction along
which this revolution continues to advance.

      Since the Cultural Revolution is a revolution, it inevitably meets
with resistance. This resistance comes chiefly from those in authority
who have wormed their way into the Party and are taking the capitalist
road. It also comes from the force of habits from the old society. At
present, this resistance is still fairly strong and stubborn. But after
all, the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution is an irresistible
general trend. There is abundant evidence that such resistance will be
quickly broken down once the masses become fully aroused.

      Because the resistance is fairly strong, there will be reversals
and even repeated reversals in this struggle. There is no harm in this.
It tempers the proletariat and other working people, and especially the
younger generation, teaches them lessons and gives them experience, and
helps them to understand that the revolutionary road zigzags and does
not run smoothly.

3  Put Daring Above Everything Else and Boldly Arouse the Masses

      The outcome of this Great Cultural Revolution will be determined
by whether or not the Party leadership dares boldly to arouse the
masses.

      Currently, there are four different situations with regard to the
leadership being given to the movement of Cultural Revolution by Party
organizations at various levels:

      (1) There is the situation in which the persons in charge of Party
organizations stand in the van of the movement and dare to arouse the
masses boldly. They put daring above everything else, they are dauntless
communist fighters and good pupils of Chairman Mao. They advocate the
big-character posters and great debates. They encourage the masses to
expose every kind of ghost and monster and also to criticize the
shortcomings and errors in the work of the persons in charge. This
correct kind of leadership is the result of putting proletarian politics
in the forefront and Mao Tse-tung’s thought in the lead.

      (2) In many units, the persons in charge have a very poor
understanding of the task of leadership in this great struggle, their
leadership is far from being conscientious and effective, and they
accordingly find themselves incompetent and in a weak position. They put
fear above everything else, stick to outmoded ways and regulations, and
are unwilling to break away from conventional practices and move ahead.
They have been taken unaware by the new order of things, the
revolutionary order of the masses, with the result that their leadership
lags behind the situation, lags behind the masses.

      (3) In some units, the persons in charge, who made mistakes of one
kind or another in the past, are even more prone to put fear above
everything else, being afraid that the masses will catch them out.
Actually, if they make serious self-criticism and accept the criticism
of the masses, the Party and the masses will make allowances for their
mistakes. But if the persons in charge don’t, they will continue to make
mistakes and become obstacles to the mass movement.

      (4) Some units are controlled by those who have wormed their way
into the Party and are taking the capitalist road. Such persons in
authority are extremely afraid of being exposed by the masses and
therefore seek every possible pretext to suppress the mass movement.
They resort to such tactics as shifting the targets for attack and
turning black into white in an attempt to lead the movement astray. When
they find themselves very isolated and no longer able to carry on as
before, they resort still more to intrigues, stabbing people in the
back, spreading rumours, and blurring the distinction between revolution
and counter-revolution as much as they can, all for the purpose of
attacking the revolutionaries.

      What the Central Committee of the Party demands of the Party
committees at all levels is that they persevere in giving correct
leadership, put daring above everything else, boldly arouse the masses,
change the state of weakness and incompetence where it exists, encourage
those comrades who have made mistakes but are willing to correct them to
cast off their mental burdens and join in the struggle, and dismiss from
their leading posts all those in authority who are taking the capitalist
road and so make possible the recapture of the leadership for the
proletarian revolution.

4  Let the Masses Educate Themselves in the Movement

      In the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution, the only method is
for the masses to liberate themselves, and any method of doing things in
their stead must not be used.

      Trust the masses, rely on them and respect their initiative. Cast
out fear. Don’t be afraid of disturbances. Chairman Mao has often told
us that revolution cannot be so very refined, so gentle, so temperate,
kind, courteous, restrained and magnanimous. Let the masses educate
themselves in this great revolutionary movement and learn to distinguish
between right and wrong and between correct and incorrect ways of doing
things.

      Make the fullest use of big-character posters and great debates to
argue matters out, so that the masses can clarify the correct views,
criticize the wrong views and expose all the ghosts and monsters. In
this way the masses will be able to raise their political consciousness
in the course of the struggle, enhance their abilities and talents,
distinguish right from wrong and draw a clear line between ourselves and
the enemy.

5  Firmly Apply the Class Line of the Party

      Who are our enemies? Who are our friends? This is a question of
the first importance for the revolution and it is likewise a question of
the first importance for the Great Cultural Revolution.

      Party leadership should be good at discovering the left and
developing and strengthening the ranks of the left; it should firmly
rely on the revolutionary left. During the movement this is the only way
to isolate the most reactionary rightists thoroughly, win over the
middle and unite with the great majority so that by the end of the
movement we shall achieve the unity of more than 95 per cent of the
cadres and more than 95 per cent of the masses.

      Concentrate all forces to strike at the handful of
ultra-reactionary bourgeois rightists and counter-revolutionary
revisionists, and expose and criticize to the full their crimes against
the Party, against socialism and against Mao Tse-tung’s thought so as to
isolate them to the maximum.

      The main target of the present movement is those within the Party
who are in authority and are taking the capitalist road.

      Care should be taken to distinguish strictly between the
anti-Party, anti-socialist rightists and those who support the Party and
socialism but have said or done something wrong or have written some bad
articles or other works.

      Care should be taken to distinguish strictly between the
reactionary bourgeois scholar despots and “authorities” on the one hand
and people who have the ordinary bourgeois academic ideas on the other.

6  Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People

      A strict distinction must be made between the two different types
of contradictions: those among the people and those between ourselves
and the enemy. Contradictions among the people must not be made into
contradictions between ourselves and the enemy; nor must contradictions
between ourselves and the enemy be regarded as contradictions among the
people.

      It is normal for the masses to hold different views. Contention
between different views is unavoidable, necessary and beneficial. In the
course of normal and full debate, the masses will affirm what is right,
correct what is wrong and gradually reach unanimity.

      The method to be used in debates is to present the facts, reason
things out, and persuade through reasoning. Any method of forcing a
minority holding different views to submit is impermissible. The
minority should be protected, because sometimes the truth is with the
minority. Even if the minority is wrong, they should still be allowed to
argue their case and reserve their views.

      When there is a debate, it should be conducted by reasoning, not
by coercion or force.

      In the course of debate, every revolutionary should be good at
thinking things out for himself and should develop the communist spirit
of daring to think, daring to speak and daring to act. On the premise
that they have the same general orientation, revolutionary comrades
should, for the sake of strengthening unity, avoid endless debate over
side issues.

7  Be on Guard Against Those Who Brand the Revolutionary Masses as “Counter-Revolutionaries”

      In certain schools, units, and work teams of the Cultural
Revolution, some of the persons in charge have organized counter-attacks
against the masses who put up big-character posters criticizing them.
These people have even advanced such slogans as: opposition to the
leaders of a unit or a work team means opposition to the Central
Committee of the Party, means opposition to the Party and socialism,
means counter-revolution. In this way it is inevitable that their blows
will fall on some really revolutionary activists. This is an error on
matters of orientation, an error of line, and is absolutely
impermissible.

      A number of persons who suffer from serious ideological errors,
and particularly some of the anti-Party and anti-socialist rightists,
are taking advantage of certain shortcomings and mistakes in the mass
movement to spread rumours and gossip, and engage in agitation,
deliberately branding some of the masses as “counter-revolutionaries.”
It is necessary to beware of such “pick-pockets” and expose their tricks
in good time.

      In the course of the movement, with the exception of cases of
active counter-revolutionaries where there is clear evidence of crimes
such as murder, arson, poisoning, sabotage or theft of state secrets,
which should be handled in accordance with the law, no measures should
be taken against students at universities, colleges, middle schools and
primary schools because of problems that arise in the movement. To
prevent the struggle from being diverted from its main target, it is not
allowed, under whatever pretext, to incite the masses or the students to
struggle against each other. Even proven rightists should be dealt with
on the merits of each case at a later stage of the movement.

8  The Question of Cadres

      The cadres fall roughly into the following four categories:

      (1) good;
      (2) comparatively good;
      (3) those who have made serious mistakes but have not become
anti-Party, anti-socialist rightists;
      (4) the small number of anti-Party, anti-socialist rightists.

      In ordinary situations, the first two categories (good and
comparatively good ) are the great majority.

      The anti-Party, anti-socialist rightists must be fully exposed,
refuted, overthrown and completely discredited and their influence
eliminated. At the same time, they should be given a chance to turn over
a new leaf.

9  Cultural Revolution Groups, Committees and Congresses

      Many new things have begun to emerge in the Great Proletarian
Cultural Revolution. The Cultural Revolutionary groups, committees and
other organizational forms created by the masses in many schools and
units are something new and of great historic importance.

      These Cultural Revolutionary groups, committees and congresses are
excellent new forms of organization whereby the masses educate
themselves under the leadership of the Communist Party. They are an
excellent bridge to keep our Party in close contact with the masses.
They are organs of power of the proletarian Cultural Revolution.

      The struggle of the proletariat against the old ideas, culture,
customs and habits left over by all the exploiting classes over
thousands of years will necessarily take a very, very long time.
Therefore, the Cultural Revolutionary groups, committees and congresses
should not be temporary organizations but permanent, standing mass
organizations. They are suitable not only for colleges, schools and
government and other organizations, but generally also for factories,
mines, other enterprises, urban districts and villages.

      It is necessary to institute a system of general elections, like
that of the Paris Commune, for electing members to the Cultural
Revolutionary groups and committees and delegates to the Cultural
Revolutionary congresses. The lists of candidates should be put forward
by the revolutionary masses after full discussion, and the elections
should be held after the masses have discussed the lists over and over
again.

      The masses are entitled at any time to criticize members of the
Cultural Revolutionary groups and committees and delegates elected to
the Cultural Revolutionary congresses. If these members or delegates
prove incompetent, they can be replaced through election or recalled by
the masses after discussion.

      The Cultural Revolutionary groups, committees and congresses in
colleges and schools should consist mainly of representatives of the
revolutionary students. At the same time, they should have a certain
number of representatives of the revolutionary teaching and
administrative staff and workers.

10  Educational Reform

      In the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution a most important task
is to transform the old educational system and the old principles and
methods of teaching.

      In this Great Cultural Revolution, the phenomenon of our schools
being dominated by bourgeois intellectuals must be completely changed.

      In every kind of school we must apply thoroughly the policy
advanced by Comrade Mao Tse-tung of education serving proletarian
politics and education being combined with productive labour, so as to
enable those receiving an education to develop morally, intellectually
and physically and to become labourers with socialist consciousness and
culture.

      The period of schooling should be shortened. Courses should be
fewer and better. The teaching material should be thoroughly
transformed, in some cases beginning with simplifying complicated
material. While their main task is to study, students should also learn
other things. That is to say, in addition to their studies they should
also learn industrial work, farming and military affairs, and take part
in the struggles of the Cultural Revolution to criticize the bourgeoisie
as these struggles occur.

11  The Question of Criticizing by Name in the Press

      In the course of the mass movement of the Cultural Revolution, the
criticism of bourgeois and feudal ideology should be well combined with
the dissemination of the proletarian world outlook and of
Marxism-Leninism, Mao Tse-tung’s thought.

      Criticism should be organized of typical bourgeois representatives
who have wormed their way into the Party and typical reactionary
bourgeois academic “authorities,” and this should include criticism of
various kinds of reactionary views in philosophy, history, political
economy and education, in works and theories of literature and art, in
theories of natural science, and in other fields.

      Criticism of anyone by name in the press should be decided after
discussion by the Party committee at the same level, and in some cases
submitted to the Party committee at a higher level for approval.

12  Policy Towards Scientists, Technicians and Ordinary Members of Working Staffs

      As regards scientists, technicians and ordinary members of working
staffs, as long as they are patriotic, work energetically, are not
against the Party and socialism, and maintain no illicit relations with
any foreign country, we should in the present movement continue to apply
the policy of “unity, criticism, unity.” Special care should be taken of
those scientists and scientific and technical personnel who have made
contributions. Efforts should be made to help them gradually transform
their world outlook and their style of work.

13  The Question of Arrangements for Integration With the Socialist Education Movement in City and Countryside

      The cultural and educational units and leading organs of the Party
and government in the large and medium cities are the points of
concentration of the present proletarian Cultural Revolution.

      The Great Cultural Revolution has enriched the socialist education
movement in both city and countryside and raised it to a higher level.
Efforts should be made to conduct these two movements in close
combination. Arrangements to this effect may be made by various regions
and departments in the light of the specific conditions.

      The socialist education movement now going on in the countryside
and in enterprises in the cities should not be upset where the original
arrangements are appropriate and the movement is going well, but should
continue in accordance with the original arrangements. However, the
questions that are arising in the present Great Proletarian Cultural
Revolution should be put to the masses for discussion at the proper
time, so as to further foster vigorously proletarian ideology and
eradicate bourgeois ideology.

      In some places, the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution is being
used as the focus in order to add momentum to the socialist education
movement and clean things up in the fields of politics, ideology,
organization and economy. This may be done where the local Party
committee thinks it appropriate.

14  Take Firm Hold of the Revolution and Stimulate Production

      The aim of the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution is to
revolutionize people’s ideology and as a consequence to achieve greater,
faster, better and more economical results in all fields of work. If the
masses are fully aroused and proper arrangements are made, it is
possible to carry on both the Cultural Revolution and production without
one hampering the other, while guaranteeing high quality in all our
work.

      The Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution is a powerful motive
force for the development of the social productive forces in our
country. Any idea of counterposing the Great Cultural Revolution to the
development of production is incorrect.

15  The Armed Forces

      In the armed forces, the cultural revolution and the socialist
education movement should be carried out in accordance with the
instructions of the Military Commission of the Central Committee of the
Party and the General Political Department of the People’s Liberation
Army.

16  Mao Tse-tung’s Thought Is the Guide for Action in the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution

      In the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution, it is imperative to
hold aloft the great red banner of Mao Tse-tung’s thought and put
proletarian politics in command. The movement for the creative study and
application of Chairman Mao Tse-tung’s works should be carried forward
among the masses of the workers, peasants and soldiers, the cadres and
the intellectuals, and Mao Tse-tung’s thought should be taken as the
guide to action in the Cultural Revolution.

      In this complex Great Cultural Revolution, Party committees at all
levels must study and apply Chairman Mao’s works all the more
conscientiously and in a creative way. In particular, they must study
over and over again Chairman Mao’s writings on the Cultural Revolution
and on the Party’s methods of leadership, such as _On New Democracy_,
_Talks at the Yenan Forum on Literature and Art_, _On the Correct
Handling of Contradictions Among the People_, _Speech at the Chinese
Communist Party’s National Conference on Propaganda Work_, _Some
Questions Concerning Methods of Leadership_ and _Methods of Work of
Party Committees_.

      Party committees at all levels must abide by the directions given
by Chairman Mao over the years, namely that they should thoroughly apply
the mass line of “from the masses, to the masses” and that they should
be pupils before they become teachers. They should try to avoid being
one-sided or narrow. They should foster materialist dialectics and
oppose metaphysics and scholasticism.

      The Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution is bound to achieve
brilliant victory under the leadership of the Central Committee of the
Party headed by Comrade Mao Tse-tung.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Peking Review Index  |  Chinese Communism  |  Selected Works of Mao
Tse-tung

 

Save
