Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



ANALYSIS OF THE CLASSES IN CHINESE SOCIETY


March 1926

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This article was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung to combat two
deviations then to be found in the Party. The exponents of the first
deviation, represented by Chen Tu-hsiu, were concerned only with
co-operation with the Kuomintang and forgot about the peasants; this was
Right opportunism. The exponents of the second deviation, represented by
Chang Kuo-tao, were concerned only with the labour movement, and
likewise forgot about the peasants; this was "Left" opportunism. Both
were aware that their own strength was inadequate, but neither of them
knew where to seek reinforcements or where to obtain allies on a mass
scale. Comrade Mao Tse-tung pointed out that the peasantry was the
staunchest and numerically the largest ally of the Chinese proletariat,
and thus solved the problem of who was the chief ally in the Chinese
revolution. Moreover, he saw that the national bourgeoisie was a
vacillating class and predicted that it would disintegrate during the
upsurge of the revolution, with its right-wing going over to the side of
imperialism. This was borne out by the events of 1927.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Who are our enemies? Who are our friends? This is a question of the
first importance for the revolution. The basic reason why all previous
revolutionary struggles in China achieved so little was their failure to
unite with real friends in order to attack real enemies. A revolutionary
party is the guide of the masses, and no revolution ever succeeds when
the revolutionary party leads them astray. To ensure that we will
definitely achieve success in our revolution and will not lead the
masses astray, we must pay attention to uniting with our real friends in
order to attack our real enemies. To distinguish real friends from real
enemies, we must make a general analysis of the economic status of the
various classes in Chinese society and of their respective attitudes
towards the revolution.

What is the condition of each of the classes in Chinese society?

_The landlord class and the comprador class._[1] In economically
backward and semi-colonial China the landlord class and the comprador
class are wholly appendages of the international bourgeoisie, depending
upon imperialism for their survival ant growth. These classes represent
the most backward and most reactionary relations of production in China
and hinder the development of her productive forces. Their existence is
utterly incompatible with the aims of the Chinese revolution. The big
landlord and big comprador classes in particular always side with
imperialism and constitute an extreme counterrevolutionary group. Their
political representatives are the _Étatistes_ [2] and the right-wing of
the Kuomintang.

_The middle bourgeoisie._ This class represents the capitalist relations
of production in China in town and country. The middle bourgeoisie, by
which is meant chiefly the national bourgeoisie, [3] is inconsistent in
its attitude towards the Chinese revolution: they feel the need for
revolution and favour the revolutionary movement against imperialism and
the warlords when they are smarting under the blows of foreign capital
and the oppression of the warlords, but they become suspicious of the
revolution when they sense that, with the militant participation of the
proletariat at home and the active support of the international
proletariat abroad, the revolution is threatening the hope of their
class to attain the status of a big bourgeoisie. Politically, they stand
for the establishment of a state under the rule of a single class, the
national bourgeoisie. A self-styled true disciple of Tai Chi-tao [4]
wrote in the _Chen Pao,_ [5] Peking, "Raise your left fist to knock down
the imperialists and your right to knock down the Communists." These
words depict the dilemma and anxiety of this class. It is against
interpreting the Kuomintang's Principle of the People's Livelihood
according to the theory of class struggle, and it opposes the
Kuomintang's alliance with Russia and the admission of Communists [6]
and left-wingers. But its attempt to establish a state under the rule of
the national bourgeoisie is quite impracticable, because the present
world situation is such that the two major forces, revolution and
counter-revolution, are locked in final struggle. Each has hoisted a
huge banner: one is the red banner of revolution held aloft by the Third
International as the rallying point for all the oppressed classes of the
world, the other is the white banner of counterrevolution held aloft by
the League of Nations as the rallying point for all the
counter-revolutionaries of the world. The intermediate classes are bound
to disintegrate quickly, some sections turning left to join the
revolution, others turning right to join the counter-revolution; there
is no room for them to remain "independent". Therefore the idea
cherished by China's middle bourgeoisie of an "independent" revolution
in which it would play the primary role is a mere illusion.

_The petty bourgeoisie._ Included in this category are the
owner-peasants, [7] the master handicraftsmen, the lower levels of the
intellectuals--students, primary and secondary school teachers, lower
government functionaries, office clerks, small lawyers--and the small
traders. Both because of its size and class character, this class
deserves very close attention. The owner-peasants and the master
handicraftsmen are both engaged in small-scale production. Although all
strata of this class have the same petty-bourgeois economic status, they
fall into three different sections. The first section consists of those
who have some surplus money or grain, that is, those who, by manual or
mental labour, earn more each year than they consume for their own
support. Such people very much want to get rich and are devout
worshipers of Marshal Chao; [8] while they have no illusions about
amassing great fortunes, they invariably desire to climb up into the
middle bourgeoisie. Their mouths water copiously when they see the
respect in which those small moneybags are held. People of this sort are
timid, afraid of government officials, and also a little afraid of the
revolution. Since they are quite close to the middle bourgeoisie in
economic status, they have a lot of faith in its propaganda and are
suspicious of the revolution. This section is a minority among the petty
bourgeoisie and constitutes its right-wing. The second section consists
of those who in the main are economically self-supporting. They are
quite different from the people in the first section; they also want to
get rich, but Marshal Chao never lets them. In recent years, moreover,
suffering from the oppression and exploitation of the imperialists, the
warlords, the feudal landlords and the big comprador-bourgeoisie, they
have become aware that the world is no longer what it was. They feel
they cannot earn enough to live on by just putting in as much work as
before. To make both ends meet they have to work longer hours, get up
earlier, leave off later, and be doubly careful at their work. They
become rather abusive, denouncing the foreigners as "foreign devils",
the warlords as "robber generals" and the local tyrants and evil gentry
as "the heartless rich". As for the movement against the imperialists
and the warlords, they; merely doubt whether it can succeed (on the
ground that the foreigners and the warlords seem so powerful), hesitate
to join it and prefer to be neutral, but they never oppose the
revolution. This section is very numerous, making up about one-half of
the petty bourgeoisie.

The third section consists of those whose standard of living is falling.
Many in this section, who originally belonged to better-off families,
are undergoing a gradual change from a position of being barely able to
manage to one of living in more and more reduced circumstances. When
they come to settle their accounts at the end of each year, they are
shocked, exclaiming, "What? Another deficit!" As such people have seen
better days and are now going downhill with every passing year, their
debts mounting and their life becoming more and more miserable, they
"shudder at the thought of the future". They are in great mental
distress because there is such a contrast between their past and their
present. Such people are quite important for the revolutionary movement;
they form a mass of no small proportions and are the left-wing of the
petty bourgeoisie. In normal times these three sections of the petty
bourgeoisie differ in their attitude to the revolution. But in times of
war, that is, when the tide of the revolution runs high and the dawn of
victory is in sight, not only will the left-wing of the petty
bourgeoisie join the revolution, but the middle section too may join,
and even tight-wingers, swept forward by the great revolutionary tide of
the proletariat and of the left-wing of the petty bourgeoisie, will have
to go along with the "evolution." We can see from the experience of the
May 30th Movement [9] of 1925 and the peasant movement in various places
that this conclusion is correct.

_The semi-proletariat._ What is here called the semi-proletariat
consists of five categories: (1) the overwhelming majority of the
semi-owner peasants, [10] (2) the poor peasants, (3) the small
handicraftsmen, (4) the shop assistants [11] and (5) the pedlars. The
overwhelming majority of the semi-owner peasants together with the poor
peasants constitute a very large part of the rural masses. The peasant
problem is essentially their problem. The semi-owner peasants, the poor
peasants and the small handicraftsmen are engaged in production on a
still smaller scale than the owner-peasants and the master
handicraftsmen. Although both the overwhelming majority of the
semi-owner peasants and the poor peasants belong to the
semi-proletariat, they may be further divided into three smaller
categories, upper, middle and lower, according to their economic
condition. The semi-owner peasants are worse off than the owner-peasants
because every year they are short of about half the food they need, and
have to make up this deficit by renting land from others, selling part
of their labour power, or engaging in petty trading. In late spring and
early summer when the crop is still in the blade and the old stock is
consumed, they borrow at exorbitant rates of interest and buy grain at
high prices; their plight is naturally harder than that of the
owner-peasants' who need no help from others, but they are better off
than the poor' peasants. For the poor peasants own no land, and receive
only half the harvest or even less for their year's toil, while the
semi-owner` peasants, though receiving only half or less than half the
harvest of land rented from others, can keep the entire crop from the
land they own. The semi-owner peasants are therefore more revolutionary
than the owner-peasants, but less revolutionary than the poor peasants.
The poor peasants are tenant-peasants who are exploited by the
landlords. They may again be divided into two categories according to
their economic status. One category has comparatively adequate farm
implements and some funds. Such peasants may retain half the product of
their year's toil. To make up their deficit they cultivate side crops,
catch fish or shrimps, raise poultry or pigs, or sell part of their
labour power, and thus eke out a living, hoping in the midst of hardship
and destitution to tide over the year. Thus their life is harder than
that of the semi-owner peasants, but they are better off than the other
category of poor peasants. They ate more revolutionary than the
semi-owner peasants, but less revolutionary than the other category of
poor peasants. As for the latter, they have neither adequate farm
implements nor funds nor enough manure, their crops are poor, and, with
little left after paying rent, they have even greater need to sell part
of their labour power. In hard times they piteously beg help from
relatives and friends, borrowing a few _tou_ or _sheng_ of grain to last
them a few days, and their debts pile up like loads on the backs of
oxen. They are the worst off among the peasants and are highly receptive
to revolutionary propaganda. The small handicraftsmen are called
semi-proletarians because, though they own some simple means of
production and moreover are self-employed, they too are often forced to
sell part of their labour power and are somewhat similar to the poor
peasants in economic status. They feel the constant pinch of poverty and
dread of unemployment, because of heavy family burdens and the gap
between their earnings and the cost of living; in this respect too they
largely resemble the poor peasants. The shop assistants are employees of
shops and stores, supporting their families on meagre pay and getting an
increase perhaps only once in several years while prices rise every
year. If by chance you get into intimate conversation with them, they
invariably pour out their endless grievances. Roughly the same in status
as the poor peasants and the small handicraftsmen, they are highly
receptive to revolutionary propaganda. The pedlars, whether they carry
their wares around on a pole or set up stalls along the street, have
tiny funds and very small earnings, and do not make enough to feed and
clothe themselves. Their status is roughly the same as that of the poor
peasants, and like the poor peasants they need a revolution to change
the existing state of affairs.

_The proletariat._ The modern industrial proletariat numbers about two
million. It is not large because China is economically backward. These
two million industrial workers are mainly employed in five
industries--railways, mining, maritime transport, textiles and
shipbuilding--and a great number are enslaved in enterprises owned by
foreign capitalists. Though not very numerous, the industrial
proletariat represents China's new productive forces, is the most
progressive class in modern China and has become the leading force in
the revolutionary movement. We can see the important position of the
industrial proletariat in the Chinese revolution from the strength it
has displayed in the strikes of the last four years, such as the
seamen's strikes, [12] the railway strike, [13] the strikes in the
Kailan and Tsiaotso coal mines, [14] the Shameen strike [15] and the
general strikes in Shanghai and Hong Kong [16] after the May 30th
Incident. The first reason why the industrial workers hold this position
is their concentration. No other section of the people is so
concentrated. The second reason is their low economic status. They have
been deprived of all means of production, have nothing left but their
hands, have no hope of ever becoming rich and, moreover, are subjected
to the most ruthless treatment by the imperialists, the warlords and the
bourgeoisie. That is why they are particularly good fighters. The
coolies in the cities are also a force meriting attention. They are
mostly dockers and rickshaw men, and among them, too, are sewage carters
and street cleaners. Possessing nothing but their hands, they are
similar in economic status to the industrial workers but are less
concentrated and play a less important role in production. There is as
yet little modern capitalist farming in China. By rural proletariat we
mean farm labourers hired by the year, the month or the day. Having
neither land, farm implements nor funds, they can live only by selling
their labour power. Of all the workers they work the longest hours, for
the lowest wages, under the worst conditions, and with the least
security of employment. They are the most hard-pressed people in the
villages, and their position in the peasant movement is as important as
that of the poor peasants.

Apart from all these, there is the fairly large lumpen-proletariat, made
up of peasants who have lost their land and handicraftsmen who cannot
get work. They lead the most precarious existence of all. In every part
of the country they have their secret societies, which were originally
their mutual-aid organizations for political and economic struggle, for
instance, the Triad Society in Fukien and Kwangtung, the Society of
Brothers in Hunan, Hupeh, Kweichow and Szechuan, the Big Sword Society
in Anhwei, Honan and Shantung, the Rational Life Society in Chihli [17]
and the three northeastern provinces, and the Green Band in Shanghai and
elsewhere [18] One of China's difficult problems is how to handle these
people. Brave fighters but apt to be destructive, they can become a
revolutionary force if given proper guidance.

To sum up, it can be seen that our enemies are all those in league with
imperialism--the warlords, the bureaucrats, the comprador class, the big
landlord class and the reactionary section of the intelligentsia
attached to them. The leading force in our revolution is the industrial
proletariat. Our closest friends are the entire semi-proletariat and
petty bourgeoisie. As for the vacillating middle bourgeoisie, their
right-wing may become our enemy and their left-wing may become our
friend but we must be constantly on our guard and not let them create
confusion within our ranks.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOTES

1 A comprador, in the original sense of the word, was the Chinese
manages or the senior Chinese employee in a foreign commercial
establishment. The compradors served foreign economic interests and bad
close connection with imperialism and foreign capital.

2 The _Étatistes_ were a handful of shameless fascist politicians who at
that time formed the Chinese _Étatiste_ Youth League, later renamed the
Chinese Youth Party. They made counter-revolutionary careers for
themselves by opposing the Communist Party and the Soviet Union and
received subsidies from the various groups of reactionaries in power and
from the imperialists.

3 For further discussion of the role of the national bourgeoisie, see
"The Chinese Revolution and the Chinese Communist Party", Chapter 2,
Section 4, _Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung,_ Vol. II.

4 Tai Chi-tao joined the Kuomintang in his youth and for a time was
Chiang Kai-shek's partner in stock exchange speculation. After Sun
Yat-sen's death in 1925 he carried on anti-Communist agitation and
prepared the ground ideologically for Chiang Kai-shek's
counter-revolutionary coup d'état in 1927. For years be was a faithful
running dog to Chiang Kai-shek in the counter-revolution. He committed
suicide in February 1949, driven to despair by the imminent doom of
Chiang Kai-shek's regime.

5 The _Chen Pao_ was the organ of the Association for the Study of
Constitutional Government, a political group which supported the rule of
the Northern warlords.

6 In 1923 Sun Yat-sen, with the help of the Chinese Communist Party,
decided to reorganize the Kuomintang bring about Kuomintang-Communist
co-operation and admit members of the Communist Party into the
Kuomintang. In January 1924 he convened in Canton the Kuomintang's First
National Congress at which he laid down the Three Great
Policies--alliance with Russia, co-operation with the Communist Party
and assistance to the peasants and workers. Mao Tse-tung, Li Ta-chao,
Lin Po-chu, Chu Chiu-pai and other comrades attended the Congress and
played an important part in helping the Kuomintang to take the road of
revolution. Some of these comrades were elected members, and others
alternate members, of the Central Executive Committee of the Kuomintang.

7 By owner-peasants Comrade Mao Tse-tung means the middle peasants.

8 Marshal Chao is Chao Kung-ming, God of Wealth in Chinese folklore.

9 The May 30th Movement was the nation-wide anti-imperialist movement in
protest against the massacre of the Chinese people by the British police
in Shanghai on May 30 1925. Earlier that month, major strikes had broken
out in Japanese-owned textile mills in Tsingtao and Shanghai, which the
Japanese imperialists and the Northern warlords who were their running
dogs proceeded to suppress. On May 15 the Japanese textile mill-owners
in Shanghai shot and killed the worker Ku Cheng-hung and wounded a dozen
others. On May 28 eight workers were slaughtered by the reactionary
government in Tsingtao. On May 30 more than two thousand students in
Shanghai agitated in the foreign concessions in support of the workers
and for the recovery of the foreign concessions. They rallied more than
ten thousand people before the British police headquarters, shouting
such slogans as "Down with imperialism!" and "People of China, unite!"
The British imperialist police opened fire, killing and wounding many
students. This became known as the May 30th Massacre. It immediately
aroused country-wide indignation, and demonstrations and strikes of
workers, students and shopkeepers were held everywhere, forming a
tremendous anti-imperialist movement.

10 By "the overwhelming majority of the semi-owner peasants", Comrade
Mao Tse-tung is here referring to the impoverished peasants who worked
partly on their own land and partly on land rented from others.

11 There were several strata of shop assistants in old China. Here
Comrade Mao Tse-tung is referring to the largest. There was also the
lower stratum of shop assistants who led the life of proletarians.

12 The seamen's strikes were staged by the seamen at Hongkong and by the
crews of the Yangtse River steamers early in 1922. The Hongkong seamen
held out for eight weeks. After a bitter and bloody struggle, the
British imperialist authorities in Hongkong were finally forced to raise
wages, lift the ban on the Seamen's Union, release the arrested workers
and indemnify the families of the martyrs. The crews of the Yangtze
steamers went on strike soon afterwards, carried on the struggle for two
weeks and also won victory.

13 Immediately after its founding in 1922-23 the Chinese Communist Party
set about organizing the railway worker. In 1922-23 strikes took place
under the Party's leadership on all the trunk lines. The best known was
the general strike on the Peking-Hankow Railway which began on February
4, 1923. It was a fight for the freedom to organize a general trade
union. On February 7 the Northern warlords Wu Pei-fu and Hsiao Yao-nan,
who were backed by British imperialism, butchered the strikers. This
became known as the February 7th Massacre.

14 The Kailan Coal Mines was an inclusive name for the large contiguous
Kaiping and Luanchow coalfields in Hopei Province, then employing over
fifty thousand workers. During the Yi Ho Tuan Movement of 1900 the
British imperialists seized the Kaiping mines. Subsequently the Chinese
organized the Luanchow Coal Mining Company, which was later incorporated
into the Kailan Mining Administration. Both coalfields thus came under
the exclusive control of British imperialism. The Kailan strike took
place in October 1922. The Tsiaotso Coal Mines, situated in Honan
Province, are also well known in China. The Tsiaotso strike lasted from
July 1 to August 9, 1925

15 Shameen, a section of the city of Canton, was held on lease by
British imperialism. In July 1924 the British imperialists who ruled it
issued a new police regulation requiring all Chinese to produce passes
with photos on leaving or entering the area. But foreigners were exempt.
On July 15 the workers in Shameen went on strike to protest against this
preposterous measure, which the British imperialists were finally forced
to cancel.

16 Following the May 30th Incident in Shanghai, general strikes broke
out on June 1, 1925 in Shanghai and on June 19 in Hong Kong. More than
200,000 workers took part in Shanghai and 250,000 in Hong Kong. The big
Hong Kong strike, with the support of the people throughout the country,
lasted sixteen months. It was the longest strike in the history of the
world labour movement.

17 Chihli was the old name for Hopei Province.

18 The Triad Society, the Society of Brothers, the Big Sword Society,
the Rational Life Society and the Green Band were primitive secret
organizations among the people. The members were mainly bankrupt
peasants, unemployed handicraftsmen and other _lumpen_-proletarians. In
feudal China these elements were often drawn together by come religion
or superstition to form organizations of a patriarchal pattern and
bearing different names and some possessed arms. Through these
organizations the _lumpen_-proletarians sought to help each other
socially and economically, and sometimes fought the bureaucrats and
landlords who oppressed them. Of course, such backward organizations
could not provide a way out for the peasants and handicraftsmen.
Furthermore, they could easily be controlled and utilized by the
landlords and local tyrants and, because of this and of their blind
destructiveness, come turned into reactionary forces. In his
counter-revolutionary coup d'etat of 1927 Chiang Kai-shek made use of
them to disrupt the unity of the labouring people and destroy the
revolution. As the modern industrial proletariat arose and grew from
strength to strength, the peasants, under the leadership of the working
class, gradually formed themselves into organizations of an entirely new
type, and these primitive, backward societies lost their _raison
d'etre._

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

Save
