
Leon Trotsky



THE CLASS, THE PARTY AND THE LEADERSHIP


Why Was the Spanish Proletariat Defeated? [Questions of Marxist Theory]

(1940)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From FOURTH INTERNATIONAL, Vol.1 No.7, December 1940, pp.191-195.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the MARXISTS’ INTERNET
ARCHIVE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| EDITORIAL NOTE: _Among comrade Trotsky’s archives were found a rough  |
| draft and fragmentary notes which we now publish in the form of an    |
| unfinished article._                                                  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

* * *

The extent to which the working class movement has been thrown backward
may be gauged not only by the condition of the mass organizations but by
ideological groupings and those theoretical inquiries in which so many
groups are engaged. In Paris there is published a periodical QUE FAIRE
(WHAT TO DO) which for some reason considers itself Marxist but in
reality remains completely within the framework of the empiricism of the
left bourgeois intellectuals and those isolated workers who have
assimilated all the vices of the intellectuals.

Like all groups lacking a scientific foundation, without a program and
without any tradition this little periodical tried to hang on to the
coat-tails of the POUM – which seemed to open the shortest avenue to the
masses and to victory. But the result of these ties with the Spanish
revolution seems at first entirely unexpected: The periodical did not
advance but on the contrary retrogressed. As a matter of fact, this is
wholly in the nature of things. The contradictions between the petty
bourgeoisie, conservatism and the needs of the proletarian revolution
have developd in the extreme. It is only natural that the defenders and
interpreters of the policies of the POUM found themselves thrown far
back both in political and theoretical fields.

The periodical QUE FAIRE is in and of itself of no importance whatever.
But it is of symptomatic interest. That is why we think it profitable to
dwell upon this periodical’s appraisal of the causes for the collapse of
the Spanish revolution, inasmuch as this appraisal discloses very
graphically the fundamental features now prevailing in the left flank of
pseudo-Marxism.
 

_Que Faire_ Explains

We begin with a verbatim quotation from a review of the pamphlet SPAIN
BETRAYED by comrade Casanova:

“Why was the revolution crushed? Because, replies the author (Casanova),
the Communist Party conducted a false policy which was unfortunately
followed by the revolutionary masses. But why, in the devil’s name, did
the revolutionary masses who teft their former leaders rally to the
banner of the Communist Party? ‘Because there was no genuinely
revolutionary party.’ We are presented with a pure tautology. A false
policy of the masses; an immature party either manifests a certain
condition of social forces (immaturity of the working class, lack of
independence of the peasantry) which must be explained by proceeding
from facts, presented among others by Casanova himself; or it is the
product of the actions of certain malicious individuals or groups of
individuals, actions which do not correspond to the efforts of ‘sincere
individuals’ alone capable of saving the revolution. After groping for
the first and Marxist road, Casanova takes the second. We are ushered
into the domain of pure demonology; the criminal responsible for the
defeat is the chief Devil, Stalin, abetted by the anarchists and all the
other little devils; the God of revolutionists unfortunately did not
send a Lenin or a Trotsky to Spain as He did in Russia in 1917.”

The conclusion then follows: “This is what comes of seeking at any cost
to force the ossified orthodoxy of a chapel upon facts.” This
theoretical haughtiness is made all the more magnificent by the fact
that it is hard to imagine how so great a number of banalities,
vulgarisms and mistakes quite specifically of conservative philistine
type could be compressed into so few lines.

The author of the above quotation avoids giving any explanation for the
defeat of the Spanish revolution; he only indicates that profound
explanations, like the “condition of social forces” are necessary. The
evasion of any explanation is not accidental. These critics of
Bolshevism are all theoretical cowards, for the simple reason that they
have nothing solid under their feet. In order not to reveal their own
bankruptcy they juggle facts and prowl around the opinions of others.
They confine themselves to hints and half-thoughts as if they just
haven’t the time to delineate their full wisdom. As a matter of fact
they possess no wisdom at all. Their haughtiness is lined with
intellectual charlatanism.

Let us analyze step by step the hints and half-thoughts of our author.
According to him a false policy of the masses can be explained only as
it “manifests a certain condition of social forces,” namely, the
immaturity of the working class and the lack of independence of the
peasantry. Anyone searching for tautologies couldn’t find in general a
flatter one. A “false policy of the masses” is explained by the
“immaturity” of the masses. But what is “immaturity” of the masses?
Obviously, their predisposition to false policies. Just what the false
policy consisted of, and who were its initiators: the masses or the
leaders – that is passed over in silence by our author. By means of a
tautology he unloads the responsibility on the masses. This classical
trick of all traitors, deserters and their attorneys is especially
revolting in connection with the Spanish proletariat.
 

Sophistry of the Betrayers

In July 1936 – not to refer to an earlier period – the Spanish workers
repelled the assault of the officers who had prepared their conspiracy
under the protection of the People’s Front. The masses improvised
militias and created workers’ committees, the strongholds of their
future dictatorship. The leading organizations of the proletariat on the
other hand helped the bourgeoisie to destroy these committees, to
liquidate the assaults of the workers on private property and to
subordinate the workers’ militias to the command of the bourgeoisie,
with the POUM moreover participating in the government and assuming
direct responsibility for this work proletariat signify in this case?
Self-evidently only this, that of the counter-revolution. What does
“immaturity” of the ...

[A line or two of text has been omitted here in the original]

... despite the correct political line chosen by the masses, the latter
were unable to smash the coalition of socialists, Stalinists, anarchists
and the POUM with the bourgeoisie. This piece of sophistry takes as its
starting point a concept of some absolute maturity, i.e. a perfect
condition of the masses in which they no not require a correct
leadership, and, more than that, are capable of conquering against their
own leadership. There is not and there cannot be such maturity.

But why should workers who show such correct revolutionary instinct and
such superior fighting qualities submit to treacherous leadership?
object our sages. Our answer is: There wasn’t even a hint of mere
subordination. The workers’ line of march at all times cut a certain
angle to the line of the leadership. And at the most critical moments
this angle became 180 degrees. The leadership then helped directly or
indirectly to subdue the workers by armed force.

In May 1937 the workers of Catalonia rose not only without their own
leadership but against it. The anarchist leaders – pathetic and
contemptible bourgeois masquerading cheaply as revolutionists – have
repeated hundreds of times in their press that had the CNT wanted to
take power and set up their dictatorship in May, they could have done so
without any difficulty. This time the anarchist leaders speak the
unadulterated truth. The POUM leadership actually dragged at the tail of
the CNT, only they covered up their policy with a different phraseology.
It was thanks to this and this alone that the bourgeoisie succeeded in
crushing the May uprising of the “immature” proletariat. One must
understand exactly nothing in the sphere of the inter-relationships
between the class and the party, between the masses and the leaders in
order to repeat the hollow statement that the Spanish masses merely
followed their leaders. The only thing that can be said is that the
masses who sought at all times to blast their way to the correct road
found it beyond their strength to produce in the very fire of battle a
new leadership corresponding to the demands of the revolution. Before us
is a profoundly dynamic process, with the various stages of the
revolution shifting swiftly, with the leadership or various sections of
the leadership quickly deserting to the side of the class enemy, and our
sages engage in a purely static discussion: Why did the working class as
a whole follow a bad leadership?
 

The Dialectic Approach

There is an ancient, evolutionary-liberal epigram: Every people gets the
government it deserves. History, however, shows that one and the same
people may in the course of a comparatively brief epoch get very
different governments (Russia, Italy, Germany, Spain, etc.) and
furthermore that the order of these governments doesn’t at all proceed
in one and the same direction: from despotism – to freedom as was
imagined by the evolutionistts liberals. The secret is this, that a
people is comprised of hostile classes, and the classes themselves are
comprised of different and in part antagonistic layers which fall under
different leadership; furthermore every people falls under the influence
of other peoples who are likewise comprised of classes. Governments do
not express the systematically growing “maturity” of a “people” but are
the product of the struggle between different classes and the different
layers within one and the same class, and, finally, the action of
external forces – alliances, conflicts, wars and so on. To this should
be added that a government, once it has established itself, may endure
much longer than the relationship of forces which produced it. It is
precisely out of this historical contradiction that revolutions, _coup
d’etats_, counterrevolutions, etc. arise.

The very same dialectic approach is necessary in dealing with the
question of the leadership of a class. Imitating the liberals our sages
tacitly accept the axiom that every class gets the leadership it
deserves. In reality leadership is not at all a mere “reflection” of a
class or the product of its own free creativeness. A leadership is
shaped in the process of clashes between the different classes or the
friction between the different layers within a given class. Having once
arisen, the leadership invariably arises above its class and thereby
becomes predisposed to the pressure and influence of other classes. The
proletariat may “tolerate” for a long time a leadership that has already
suffered a complete inner degeneration but has not as yet had the
opportunity to express this degeneration amid great events. A great
historic shock is necessary to reveal sharply the contradiction between
the leadership and the class. The mightiest historical shocks are wars
and revolutions. Precisely for this reason the working class is often
caught unawares by war and revolution. But even in cases where the old
leadership has revealed its internal corruption, the class cannot
improvise immediately a new leadership, especially if it has not
inherited from the previous period strong revolutionary cadres capable
of utilizing the collapse of the old leading party. The Marxist, i.e.
dialectic and not scholastic interpretation of the inter-relationship
between a class and its leadership does not leave a single stone
unturned of our author’s legalistic sophistry.
 

How the Russian Workers Matured

He conceives of the proletariat’s maturity as something purely static.
Yet during a revolution the consciousness of a class is the most dynamic
process directly determining the course of the revolution. Was it
possible in January 1917 or even in March, after the overthrow of
Czarism, to give an answer to the question whether the Russian
proletariat had sufficiently “matured” for the conquest of power in
eight to nine months? The working class was at that time extremely
heterogeneous socially and politically. During the years of the war it
had been renewed by 30-40 percent from the ranks of the petty
bourgeoisie, often reactionary, at the expense of backward peasants, at
the expense of women and youth. The Bolshevik party in March 1917 was
followed by an insignificant minority of the working class and
furthermore there was discord within the party itself. The overwhelming
majority of the workers supported the Mensheviks and the
“Socialists-Revolutionists” i.e., conservative social-patriots. The
situation was even less favorable with regard to the army and the
peasantry. We must add to this: the general low level of culture in the
country, the lack of political experience among the broadest layers of
the proletariat, especially in the provinces, let alone the peasants and
soldiers.

What was the “active” [1] of Bolshevism? A clear and thoroughly thought
out revolutionary conception at the beginning of the revolution was held
only by Lenin. The Russian cadres of the party were scattered and to a
considerable degree bewildered. But the party had authority among the
advanced workers. Lenin had great authority with the party cadres.
Lenin’s political conception corresponded to the actual development of
the revolution and was reinformed by each new event. These elements of
the “active” worked wonders in a revolutionary situation, that is, in
conditions of bitter class struggle. The party quickly aligned its
policy to correspond with Lenin’s conception, to correspond that is with
the actual course of the revolution. Thanks to this it met with firm
support among tens of thousands of advanced workers. Within a few
months, by basing itself upon the development of the revolution the
party was able to convince the majority of the workers of the
correctness of its slogans. This majority organized into Soviets was
able in its turn to attract the soldiers and peasants. How can this
dynamic, dialectic process be exhausted by a formula of the maturity or
immaturity of the proletariat? A colossal factor in the maturity of the
Russian proletariat in February or March 1917 was Lenin. He did not fall
from the skies. He personified the revolutionary tradition of the
working class. For Lenin’s slogans to find their way to the masses there
had to exist cadres, even though numerically small at the beginning;
there had to exist the confidence of the cadres in the leadership, a
confidence based on the entire experience of the past. To cancel these
elements from one’s calculations is simply to ignore the living
revolution, to substitute for it an abstraction, the “relationship of
forces,” because the development of the revolution precisely consists of
this, that the relationship of forces keeps incessantly and rapidly
changing under the impact of the changes in the consciousness of the
proletariat, the attraction of backward layers to the advanced, the
growing assurance of the class in its own strength. The vital mainspring
in this process is the party, just as the vital mainspring in the
mechanism of the party is its leadership. The role and the
responsibility of the leadership in a revolutionary epoch is colossal.
 

Relativity of “Maturity”

The October victory is a serious testimonial of the “maturity” of the
proletariat. But this maturity is relative. A few years later the very
same proletariat permitted the revolution to be strangled by a
bureaucracy which rose from its ranks. Victory is not at all the ripe
fruit of the proletariat’s “maturity.” Victory is a strategical task. It
is necessary to utilize the favorable conditions of a revolutionary
crisis in order to mobilize the masses; taking as a starting point the
given level of their “maturity” it is necessary to propel them forward,
teach them to understand that the enemy is by no means omnipotent, that
it is torn asunder with contradictions, that behind the imposing facade
panic prevails. Had the Bolshevik party failed to carry out this work,
there couldn’t even be talk of the victory of the proletarian
revolution. The Soviets would have been crushed by the
counter-revolution and the little sages of all countries would have
written articles and books on the keynote that only uprooted visionaries
could dream in Russia of the dictatorship of the proletariat, so small
numerically and so immature.
 

Auxiliary Role of Peasants

Equally abstract, pedantic and false is the reference to the “lack of
independence” of the peasantry. When and where did our sage ever observe
in capitalist society a peasantry with an independent revolutionary
program or a capacity for independent revolutionary initiative? The
peasantry can play a very great role in the revolution, but only an
auxiliary role.

In many instances the Spanish peasants acted boldly and fought
courageously. But to rouse the entire mass of the peasantry, the
proletariat had to set an example of a decisive uprising against the
bourgeoisie and inspire the peasants with faith in the possibility of
victory. In the meantime the revolutionary initiative of the proletariat
itself was paralyzed at every step by its own organizations.

The “immaturity” of the proletariat, the “lack of independence” of the
peasantry are neither final nor basic factors in historical events.
Underlying the consciousness of the classes are the classes themselves,
their numerical strength, their role in economic life. Underlying the
classes is a specific system of production which is determined in its
turn by the level of the development of productive forces. Why not then
say that the defeat of the Spanish proletariat was determined by the low
level of technology?
 

The Role of Personality

Our author substitutes mechanistic determinism for the dialectic
conditioning of the historical process. Hence the cheap jibes about the
role of individuals, good and bad. History is a process of the class
struggle. But classes do not bring their full weight to bear
automatically and simultaneously. In the process of struggle the classes
create various organs which play an important and independent role and
are subject to deformations. This also provides the basis for the role
of personalities in history. There are naturally great objective causes
which created the autocratic rule of Hitler but only dull-witted pedants
of “determinism” could deny today the enormous historic role of Hitler.
The arrival of Lenin in Petrograd on April 3, 1917 turned the Bolshevik
party in time and enabled the party to lead the revolution to victory.
Our sages might say that had Lenin died abroad at the beginning of 1917,
the October revolution would have taken place “just the same.” But that
is not so. Lenin represented one of the living elements of the
historical process. He personified the experience and the perspicacity
of the most active section of the proletariat. His timely appearance on
the arena of the revolution was necessary in order to mobilize the
vanguard and provide it with an opportunity to rally the working class
and the peasant masses. Political leadership in the crucial moments of
historical turns can become just as decisive a factor as is the role of
the chief command during the critical moments of war. History is not an
automatic process. Otherwise, why leaders? why parties? why programs?
why theoretical struggles?
 

Stalinism in Spain

“But why, in the devil’s name,” asks the author as we have already
heard, “did the revolutionary masses who left their former leaders,
rally to the banner of the Communist Party?” The question is falsely
posed. It is not true that the revolutionary masses left all of their
former leaders. The workers who were previously connected with specific
organizations continued to cling to them, while they observed and
checked. Workers in general do not easily break with the party that
awakens them to conscious life. Moreover the existence of mutual
protection within the People’s Front lulled them: Since everybody
agreed, everything must be all right. The new and fresh masses naturally
turned to the Comintern as the party which had accomplished the only
victorious proletarian revolution and which, it was hoped, was capable
of assuring arms to Spain. Furthermore the Comintern was the most
zealous champion of the idea of the People’s Front; this inspired
confidence among the inexperienced layers of workers. Within the
People’s Front the Comintern was the most zealous champion of the
bourgeois character of the revolution; this inspired the confidence of
the petty and in part the middle bourgeoisie. That is why the masses
“rallied to the banner of the Communist Party.”

Our author depicts the matter as if the proletariat were in a
well-stocked shoe store, selecting a new pair of boots. Even this simple
operation, as is well known, does not always prove successful. As
regards new leadership, the choice is very limited. Only gradually, only
on the basis of their own experience through several stages can the
broad layers of the masses become convinced that a new leadership is
firmer, more reliable, more loyal than the old. To be sure, during a
revolution, i.e., when events move swiftly, a weak party can quickly
grow into a mighty one provided it lucidly understands the course of the
revolution and possesses staunch cadres that do not become intoxicated
with phrases and are not terrorized by persecution. But such a party
must be available prior to the revolution inasmuch as the process of
educating the cadres requires a considerable period of time and the
revolution does not afford this time.
 

Treachery of the POUM

To the left of all the other parties in Spain stood the POUM, which
undoubtedly embraced revolutionary proletarian elements not previously
firmly tied to anarchism. But it was precisely this party that played a
fatal role in the; development of the Spanish revolution. It could not
become a mass party because in order to do so it was first necessary to
overthrow the old parties and it was possible to overthrow them only by
an irreconcilable struggle, by a merciless exposure of their bourgeois
character. Yet the POUM while criticizing the old parties subordinated
itself to them on all fundamental questions. It participated in the
“People’s” election bloc; entered the government which liquidated
workers’ committees; engaged in a struggle to reconstitute this
governmental coalition; capitulated time and again to the anarchist
leadership; conducted, in connection with this, a false trade union
policy; took a vacillating and non-revolutionary attitude toward the May
1937 uprising. From the standpoint of determinism in general it is
possible of course to recognize that the policy of the POUM was not
accidental. Everything in this world has its cause. However, the series
of causes engendering the Centrism of the POUM are by no means a mere
reflection of condition of the Spanish or Catalonian proletariat. Two
causalities moved toward each other at an angle and at a certain moment
they came into hostile conflict. It is possible by taking into account
previous international experience, Moscow’s influence, the influence of
a number of defeats, etc. to explain politically and psychologically why
the POUM unfolded as a centrist party. But this does not alter its
centrist character, nor does it alter the fact that a centrist party
invariably acts as a brake upon the revolution, must each time smash its
own head, and may bring about the collapse of the revolution. It does
not alter the fact that the Catalonian masses were far more
revolutionary than the POUM, which in turn was more revolutionary than
its leadership. In these conditions to unload the responsibility for
false policies on the “immaturity” of the masses is to engage in sheer
charlatanism frequently resorted to by political bankrupts.
 

Responsibility of Leadership

The historical falsification consists in this, that the responsibility
for the defeat of the Spanish masses is unloaded on the working masses
and not those parties which paralyzed or simply crushed the
revolutionary movement of the masses. The attorneys of the POUM simply
deny the responsibility of the leaders, in order thus to escape
shouldering their own responsibility. This impotent philosophy, which
seeks to reconcile defeats as a necessary link in the chain of cosmic
developments, is completely incapable of posing and refuses to pose the
question of such concrete factors as programs, parties, personalities
that were the organizers of defeat. This philosophy of fatalism and
prostration is diametrically opposed to Marxism as the theory of
revolutionary action.

Civil war is a process wherein political tasks are solved by military
means. Were the outcome of this war determined by the “condition of
class forces,” the war itself would not be necessary. War has its own
organization, its own policies, its own methods, its own leadership by
which its fate is directly determined. Naturally, the “condition of
class forces” supplies the foundation for all other political factors;
but just as the foundation of a building does not reduce the importance
of walls, windows, doors, roofs, so the “condition of classes” does not
invalidate the importance of parties, their strategy, their leadership.
By dissolving the concrete in the abstract, our sages really halted
midway. The most “profound” solution of the problem would have been to
declare the defeat of the Spanish proletariat as due to the inadequate
development of productive forces. Such a key is accessible to any fool.

By reducing to zero the significance of the party and of the leadership
these sages deny in general the possibility of revolutionary victory.
Because there are not the least grounds for expecting conditions more
favorable. Capitalism has ceased to advance, the proletariat does not
grow numerically, on the contrary it is the army of unemployed that
grows, which does not increase but reduces the fighting force of the
proletariat and has a negative effect also upon its consciousness. There
are similarly no grounds for believing that under the regime of
capitalism the peasantry is capable of attaining a higher revolutionary
consciousness. The conclusion from the analysis of our author is thus
complete pessimism, a sliding away from revolutionary perspectives. It
must be said – to do them justice – that they do not themselves
understand what they say.

As a matter of fact, the demands they make upon the •consciousness of
the masses are utterly fantastic. The Spanish workers, as well as the
Spanish peasants gave the maximum of what these classes are able to give
in a revolutionary situation. We have in mind precisely the class of
millions and tens of millions.

QUE FAIRE represents merely one of these little schools, or churches or
chapels who frightened by the course of the class struggle and the onset
of reaction publish their little journals and their theoretical etudes
in a corner, on the sidelines away from the actual developments of
revolutionary thought, let alone the movement of the masses.
 

Repression of Spanish Revolution

The Spanish proletariat fell the victim of a coalition composed of
imperialists, Spanish republicans, socialists, anarchists, Stalinists,
and on the left flank, the POUM. They all paralyzed the socialist
revolution which the Spanish proletariat had actually begun to realize.
It is not easy to dispose of the socialist revolution. No one has yet
devised other methods than ruthless repressions, massacre of the
vanguard, execution of the leaders, etc. The POUM of course did not want
this. It wanted on the one hand to participate in the Republican
government and to enter as a loyal peace-loving opposition into the
general bloc of ruling parties; and on the other hand to achieve
peaceful comradely relations at a time when it was a question of
implacable civil war. For this very reason the POUM fell victim to the
contradictions of its own policy. The most consistent policy in the
ruling bloc was pursued by the Stalinists. They were the fighting
vanguard of the bourgeois-republican counter-revolution. They wanted to
eliminate the need of Fascism by proving to the Spanish and world
bourgeoisie that they were themselves capable of strangling the
proletarian revolution under the banner of “democracy.” This was the
gist of their policies. The bankrupts of the Spanish People’s Front are
today trying to unload the blame on the GPU. I trust that we cannot be
suspected of leniency toward the crimes of the GPU. But we see clearly
and we tell the workers that the GPU acted in this instance only as the
most resolute detachment in the service of the People’s Front. Therein
was the strength of the GPU, therein was the historic role of Stalin.
Only ignorant philistines can wave this aside with stupid little jokes
about the Chief Devil.

These gentlemen do not even bother with the question of the social
character of the revolution. Moscow’s lackeys, for the benefit of
England and France, proclaimed the Spanish revolution as bourgeois. Upon
this fraud were erected the perfidious policies of the People’s Front,
policies which would have been completely false even if the Spanish
revolution had really been bourgeois. But from the very beginning the
revolution expressed much more graphically the proletarian character
than did the revolution of 1917 in Russia. In the leadership of the POUM
gentlemen sit today who consider that the policy of Andres Nin was too
“leftist,” that the really correct thing was to have remained the left
flank of the People’s Front. The real misfortune was that Nin, covering
himself with the authority of Lenin and the October revolution, could
not make up his mind to break with the People’s Front. Victor Serge who
is in a hurry to compromise himself by a frivolous attitude toward
serious questions writes that Nin did not wish to submit to commands
from Oslo or Coyoacan. Can a serious man really be capable of reducing
to petty gossip the problem of the class content of a revolution? The
sages of QUE FAIRE have no answer whatever to this question. They do not
understand the question itself. Of what significance indeed is the fact
that the “immature” proletariat founded its own organs of power, seized
enterprises, sought to regulate production while the POUM tried with all
its might to keep from breaking with bourgeois anarchists who in an
alliance with the bourgeois republicans and the no less bourgeois
socialists and Stalinists assaulted and strangled the proletarian
revolution! Such “trifles” are obviously of interest only to
representatives of “ossified orthodoxy.” The sages of QUE FAIRE possess
instead a special apparatus which measures the maturity of the
proletariat and the relationship of forces independently of all
questions of revolutionary class strategy ...

 

Footnote

1. Untranslatable term, which means in part “liquid assets.” – _Trans._

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[return] 

Last updated on: 22.9.2007

Save
