
V. I. Lenin



FIRST CONGRESS OF THE COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL


------------------------------------------------------------------------

Delivered: March 2-6, 1919
First Published: (see details at the end of each section); 1920 (in
full)
Source: Lenin Collected Works, Volume 28 (p. 455-477)
Transcription\Markup: Brian Baggins
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive (marxists.org) 2000

Background and Description of the First Congress

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

Speech at the Opening Session of the Congress

March 2

On behalf of the Central Committee of the Russian Communist Party I
declare the First Congress of the Communist International open. First I
would ask all present to rise in tribute to the finest representatives
of the Third International: Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg. ( _All
rise_ .)

Comrades, our gathering has great historic significance. It testifies to
the collapse of all the illusions cherished by bourgeois democrats. Not
only in Russia, but in the most developed capitalist countries of
Europe, in Germany for example, civil war is a fact.

The bourgeois are terror-stricken at the growing workers’ revolutionary
movement. This is understandable if we take into account that the
development of events since the imperialist war inevitably favors the
workers’ revolutionary movement, and that the world revolution is
beginning and growing in intensity everywhere.

The people are aware of the greatness and significance of the struggle
now going on. All that is needed is to find the practical form to enable
the proletariat to establish its rule. Such a form is the Soviet system
with the dictatorship of the proletariat. Dictatorship of the
proletariat—until now these words were Latin to the masses. Thanks to
the spread of the Soviets throughout the world this Latin has been
translated into all modern languages; a practical form of dictatorship
has been found by the working people. The mass of workers now understand
it thanks to Soviet power in Russia, thanks to the Spartacus League in
Germany and to similar organizations in other countries, such as, for
example, the Shop Stewards Committees in Britain. All this shows that a
revolutionary form of the dictatorship of the proletariat has been
found, that the proletariat is now able to exercise its rule.

Comrades, I think that after the events in Russia and the January
struggle in Germany, it is especially important to note that in other
countries, too, the latest form of the workers’ movement is asserting
itself and getting the upper hand. Today, for example, I read in an
anti-socialist newspaper a report to the effect that the British
government had received a deputation from the Birmingham Workers’
Counsel and had expressed its readiness to recognize the Councils as
economic bodies. ^([A]) The Soviet system has triumphed not only in
backward Russia, but also in the most developed country of Europe—in
Germany, and in Britain, the oldest capitalist country.

Even though the bourgeoisie are still raging, even though they may kill
thousands more workers, victory will be ours, the victory of the
worldwide Communist revolution is assured.

Comrades, I extend hearty greetings to you on behalf of the Central
Committee of the Russian Communist Party. I move that we elect a
presidium. Let us have nominations. ^([B])

First published in 1920, in German, in the book “Der I. Kongress der
Kommunistischen Internationale. Protokoll” in Petrograd. First published
in Russian in 1921 in the book “First Congress of the Communist
International. Minutes” in Petrograd.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

Thesis and Report on Bourgeois Democracy and the Dictatorship of the Proletariat March 4

1. Faced with the growth of the revolutionary workers’ movement in every
country, the bourgeoisie and their agents in the workers’ organizations
are making desperate attempts to find ideological and political
arguments in defense of the rule of the exploiters. Condemnation of
dictatorship and a sense of democracy are particularly prominent among
these arguments. The falsity and hypocrisy of this argument, repeated in
a thousand strains by the capitalist press and at the Berne yellow
International Conference in February 1919, are obvious to all who refuse
to betray the fundamental principles of socialism.

2. Firstly, this argument employs the concepts of “democracy in general”
and “dictatorship in general “, without posing the question of the class
concerned. This nonclass or above class presentation, which supposedly
is popular, is an outright travesty of the basic tenet of socialism,
namely, its theory of class struggle, which Socialists who have sided
with the bourgeoisie recognize in words but disregard in practice. For
in no civilized capitalist country does “democracy in general” exist;
all that exists is bourgeois democracy, and it is not a question of
“dictatorship in general", but of the dictatorship of the oppressed
class, i.e., the proletariat, over its oppressors and exploiters, i.e.,
the bourgeoisie, in order to overcome the resistance offered by the
exploiters in their fight to maintain their domination.

3. History teaches us that no oppressed class ever did, or could,
achieve power without going through a period of dictatorship, i.e., the
conquest of political power and forceable suppression of the resistance
always offered by the exploiters—the resistance that is most desperate,
most furious, and that stops at nothing. The bourgeoisie, whose
domination is now defended by the Socialists who denounce “dictatorship
in general” and extol “democracy in general", won power in the advanced
countries through a series of insurrections, civil wars, and the
forcible suppression of kings, feudal lords, slaveowners and their
attempts at restoration. In books, pamphlets, Congress resolutions, and
propaganda speeches, Socialists have everywhere thousands and millions
of times explained to people the class nature of these bourgeois
revolutions and this bourgeois dictatorship. That is why the present
defense of bourgeois democracy under the cover of talk about “democracy
in general", and the present howls and shouts against proletarian
dictatorship under the cover of shouts about “dictatorship in general",
are an outright betrayal of socialism. They are, in fact, desertion to
the bourgeoisie, denial of the proletariat’s right to its own,
proletarian revolution, and a defense of bourgeois reformism at the very
historical juncture when bourgeois reformism throughout the world has
collapsed and the war has created a revolutionary situation.

4. In explaining the class nature of bourgeois civilization, bourgeois
democracy and the bourgeois parliamentary system, all Socialists have
expressed the idea formulated with the greatest scientific precision by
Marx and Engels [Engels Introduction to the The Civil War in France],
namely, that the most democratic bourgeois republic is no more than a
machine for the suppression of the working class by the bourgeoisie, for
the suppression of the working people by a handful of capitalists. There
is not a single revolutionary, not a single Marxist among those now
shouting against dictatorship and for democracy, who has not sworn and
vowed to the workers that he excepts this basic truth of socialism. But
now, when the revolutionary proletariat is in a fighting mood and taking
action to destroy this machine of oppression and to establish
proletarian dictatorship, these traitors to socialism claim that the
bourgeoisie have granted the working people “pure democracy", have
abandoned resistance and are prepared to yield to the majority of the
working people. They assert that in a democratic republic there is not,
and never has been, any such thing as a state machine for the
suppression of labor by capital.

5. The Paris Commune—to which all who parade as Socialists pay lip
service (for they know that the workers ardently and sincerely
sympathize with though Commune) —showed very clearly the historically
conventional nature and limited value of the bourgeois parliamentary
system and bourgeois democracy; institutions which, though highly
progressive compared with medieval times, inevitably require a radical
alteration in the era of proletarian revolution. It was Marx who best
appraised the historical significance of the Commune. In his analysis,
he revealed the exploiting nature of bourgeois democracy in the
bourgeois parliamentary system under which the oppressed classes enjoy
the right to decide once in several years which representative of the
propertied classes shall “represent and suppress” ( _ver- und zertreten_
) the people in parliament. And it is now, when the Soviet movement is
embracing the entire world and continuing the work of the Commune for
all to see, that the traitors to socialism are forgetting the concrete
experience and concrete lessons of the Paris Commune and repeating the
old bourgeois rubbish about “democracy in general”. The Commune was not
a parliamentary institution.

6. The significance of the commune, furthermore, lies in the fact that
it endeavored to crush, to smash to its very foundations, the bourgeois
state apparatus, the bureaucratic, judicial, military and police
machine, and to replace it by a self-governing, mass workers’
organization in which there was no division between legislative and
executive power. All contemporary bourgeois-democratic republic’s,
including the German republic—which the traitors to socialism, in
mockery of the truth, describe as a proletarian republic—retain this
state apparatus. We therefore again get quite clear confirmation of the
point that shouting in defense of “democracy in general” is actually
defense of the bourgeoisie and their privileges as exploiters.

7. “Freedom of assembly” can be taken as a sample of the requisites of
“pure democracy”. Every class conscience worker who has not broken with
his class will readily appreciate the absurdity of promising freedom of
assembly to the exploiters at a time and in a situation when the
exploiters are resisting the overthrow of their rule and are fighting to
retain their privileges. When the bourgeoisie were revolutionary, they
did not, neither in England in 1649 nor in France in 1793, grant
“freedom of assembly” to the monarchists and nobles, who summoned
foreign troops and “assembled” to organize attempts at restoration. If
the present day bourgeoisie, who have long since become reactionary,
demand from proletariat advance guarantees of “freedom of assembly” for
the exploiters, whatever the resistance offered by the capitalists to
being expropriated, the workers will only laugh at their hypocrisy.

The workers know perfectly well, too, that even in the most democratic
bourgeois republic “freedom of assembly” is a hollow phrase, for the
rich have the best public and private buildings at their disposal, and
enough leisure to assemble at meetings, which are protected by the
bourgeois machine of power. The rural and urban workers and small
peasants—the overwhelming majority of the population—are denied all
these things. As long as that state of affairs prevails, “equality",
i.e., “pure democracy", is a fraud. The first thing to do to win genuine
equality and enable the working people to enjoy democracy in practice is
to deprive the exploiters of all the public and sumptuous private
buildings, to give to the working people leisure and to see to it that
their freedom of assembly is protected by armed workers, not by heirs of
the nobility or capitalist officers in command of downtrodden soldiers.

Only when that change is affected can we speak of freedom of assembly
and of equality without mocking at the workers, at working people in
general, at the poor. And this change can be affected only by the
vanguard of the working people, the proletariat, which overthrows the
exploiters, the bourgeoisie.

8. “Freedom of the press” is another of the principal slogans of “pure
democracy”. And here, too, the workers know — and Socialists everywhere
have explained millions of times —that this freedom is a deception
because the best printing presses and the biggest stocks of paper are
appropriated by the capitalists, and while capitalist rule over the
press remains—a rule that is manifested throughout the whole world all
the more strikingly, sharply and cynically—the more democracy and the
republican system are developed, as in America for example. The first
thing to do to win really equality and genuine democracy for the working
people, for the workers and peasants, is to deprive capital of the
possibility of hiring writers, buying publishing houses and bribing
newspapers. And to do that the capitalists and exploiters have to be
overthrown and their resistance oppressed. The capitalists have always
use the term “freedom” to mean freedom for the rich to get richer and
for the workers to starve to death. And capitalist usage, freedom of the
press means freedom of the rich to bribe the press, freedom to use their
wealth to shape and fabricate so-called public opinion. In this respect,
too, the defenders of “pure democracy” prove to be defenders of an
utterly foul and venal system that gives the rich control over the mass
media. They prove to be deceivers of the people, who, with the aid of
plausible, fine-sounding, but thoroughly false phrases, divert them from
the concrete historical task of liberating the press from capitalist
enslavement. Genuine freedom and equality will be embodied in the system
which the Communists are building, and in which there will be no
opportunity for massing wealth at the expense of others, no objective
opportunities for putting the press under the direct or indirect power
of money, and no impediments in the way of any workingman (or groups of
workingman, in any numbers) for enjoying and practicing equal rights in
the use of public printing presses and public stocks of paper.

9. The history of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries demonstrated,
even before the war, what this celebrated “pure democracy” really is
under capitalism. Marxists have always maintained that the more
developed, the “purer" democracy is, the more naked, acute and merciless
the class struggle becomes, and the “purer” the capitalist oppression
and bourgeois dictatorship. The Dreyfus case in republican France, the
massacre of strikers by hired bands armed by the capitalists in the free
and democratic American republic —these and thousands of similar facts
illustrate the truth which the bourgeoisie are mainly seeking to
conceal, namely, that actually terror and bourgeois dictatorship prevail
in the most democratic of republics and are openly displayed every time
the exploiters think the power of capital is being shaken.

10. The imperialist war of 1914-18 conclusively revealed even to
backward workers the true nature of bourgeois democracy, even in the
freest republics, as being a dictatorship of the bourgeoisie. Tens of
millions were killed for the sake of enriching the German or the British
group of millionaires and multimillionaires, and bourgeois military
dictatorships were established in the freest republics. This military
dictatorship continues to exist in the Allied countries even after
Germany’s defeat. It was mostly the war that opened the eyes of the
working people, that striped bourgeois democracy of its camouflage and
showed the people the abyss of speculation and profiteering that existed
during because of the war. It was in the name of “freedom and equality”
that the bourgeoisie wage the war, in the name of “freedom and equailty”
that the munitions manufacturers piled up fabulous fortunes. Nothing
that the yellow Berne International does can conceal from the people the
now thoroughly exposed exploiting character of bourgeois freedom,
bourgeois equality and bourgeois democracy.

11. In Germany, the most developed capitalist country of Continental
Europe, the very first months of full Republican freedom, establish as a
result of imperialist Germany’s defeat, have shown the German workers
and the whole world the true class substance of the bourgeois-democratic
republic. The murder of Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg is an event
of epoch-making significance not only because of the tragic death of
these finest people and leaders of the truly proletarian, Communist
International, but also because the class nature of an advanced European
state—it can be said without exaggeration, of an advanced state, on a
worldwide scale —has been conclusively exposed. If those arrested, i.e.,
those placed under state protection, could be assassinated by officers
and capitalists with impunity, and this under the government headed by
social patriots, in the democratic republic where such a thing was
possible is a bourgeois dictatorship. Those who voice their indignation
at the murder of Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg but fail to
understand this fact are only demonstrating their stupidity, or
hypocrisy. “Freedom” in the German republic, one of the freest and
advanced republics of the world, is freedom to murder arrested leaders
of the proletariat with impunity. Nor can it be otherwise as long as
capitalism remains, for the development of democracy sharpens rather
than dampens the class struggle which, by virtue of all the results and
influences of the war and of its consequences, has been brought to
boiling point.

Throughout the civilized world we see Bolsheviks being exiled,
persecuted and thrown into prison. This is the case, for example, in
Switzerland, one of the freest bourgeois republics, and in America,
where there has been anti-Bolshevik pogroms, etc. . From the standpoint
of “democracy in general", or “pure democracy", it is really ridiculous
that advanced, civilized, and democratic countries, which are armed to
the teeth, should fear the presence of a few score men from backward,
famine stricken and ruined Russia, which the bourgeois papers, in tens
of millions of copies, described as savage, criminal, etc.. Clearly, the
social situation that could produce this crying contradiction is in fact
a dictatorship of the bourgeoisie.

12. In these circumstances, proletarian dictatorship is not only an
absolutely legitimate means of overthrowing exploiters and suppressing
the resistance, but also absolutely necessary to the entire mass of
working people, being their only defense against the bourgeois
dictatorship which led to the war and is preparing new wars.

The main thing that Socialists fail to understand—which constitutes
their shortsightedness in matters of theory, their subservience to
bourgeois prejudices, and their political betrayal of the proletariat—is
that in capitalist society, whenever there is any serious aggravation of
the class struggle intrinsic to that society, there can be no
alternative but the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie or the dictatorship
of the proletariat. Dreams of some third way are reactionary,
petty-bourgeois limitations. That is borne out by more than a century of
development of bourgeois democracy in the working-class movement in all
the advanced countries, and notably by the experience of the past five
years. This is also borne out by the whole science of political economy,
by the entire content of Marxism, which reveals the economic
inevitability, wherever commodity economy prevails, of the dictatorship
of the bourgeoisie that can only be replaced by the class which the very
growth of capitalism develops, multiplies, welds together and
strengthens; that is, the proletarian class.

13. Another theoretical and political error of the Socialists is their
failure to understand that ever since the rudiments of democracy first
appeared in antiquity, its forms notably changed over the centuries as
one ruling class replaced another. Democracy assumed different forms and
was applied in different degrees in the ancient republics of Greece, the
medieval cities and the advanced capitalist countries. It would be sheer
nonsense to think that the most profound revolution in human history,
the first case in the world of power being transferred from the
exploiting minority to the exploited majority, could take place within
the time-worn framework of the old, bourgeois, parliamentary democracy,
without drastic changes, without the creation of new forms of democracy,
new institutions that embody the new conditions for applying democracy,
etc.

14. Proletarian dictatorship is similar to dictatorship of other classes
in that it arises out of the need, as every other dictatorship does, to
forcibly suppresses the resistance of the class that is losing its
political sway. The fundamental distinction between the dictatorship of
the proletariat and a dictatorship of the other classes — landlord
dictatorship in the Middle Ages and bourgeois dictatorship in all
civilized capitalist countries — consists in the fact that the
dictatorship of landowners and bourgeoisie was a forcible suppression of
the resistance offered by the vast majority of the population, namely,
the working people. In contrast, proletarian dictatorship is a forcible
suppression of the resistance of the exploiters, i.e., of an
insignificant minority the population, the landlords and capitalists.

It follows that proletarian dictatorship must inevitably entail not only
a change in the democratic forms and institutions, generally speaking,
but precisely such change as provides an unparalleled extension of the
actual enjoyment of democracy by those oppressed by capitalism—the
toiling classes.

And indeed, the form of proletarian dictatorship that has already taken
shape, i.e., Soviet power in Russia, the Räte-System in Germany, the
Shop Stewards Committees in Britain and similar Soviet institutions in
other countries, all this implies and presents to the toiling classes,
i.e., the vast majority of the population, greater practical
opportunities for enjoying democratic rights and liberties than ever
existed before, even approximately, in the best and the most democratic
bourgeois republics.

The substance of Soviet government is that the permanent and only
foundation of state power, the entire machinery of state, is the mass
scale organization of the classes oppressed by capitalism, i.e., the
workers and semi-proletarians (peasants who do not exploit the labor of
others and regularly resort to the sale of at least a part of their own
labor power). It is the people, who even in the most democratic
bourgeois republics, while possessing equal rights by law, have in fact
been debarred by thousands of devices and subterfuges from participation
in political life and enjoyment of democratic rights and liberties, that
are now drawn into constant and unfailing, moreover, decisive,
participation in the democratic administration of the state.

15. The equality of citizens, irrespective of sex, religion, race, or
nationality, which bourgeois democracy everywhere has always promised
but never affected, and never could affect because of the domination of
capital, is given immediate and full effect by the Soviet system, or
dictatorship of the proletariat. The fact is that this can only be done
by a government of the workers, who are not interested in the means of
production being privately owned and in the fight for their division and
redivision.

16. The old, i.e., bourgeois, democracy and the parliamentary system
were so organized that it was the mass of working people who were kept
farthest away from a machinery of government. Soviet power, i.e., the
dictatorship of the proletariat, on the other hand, is so organized as
to bring the working people close to the machinery of government. That,
too, is the purpose of combining the legislative and executive authority
under the Soviet organization of the state and of replacing territorial
constituencies by production units—the factory.

17. The Army was a machine of oppression not only under the monarchy. It
remains as such in all bourgeois republics, even the most democratic
ones. Only the Soviets, the permanent organizations of government
authority of the classes that were oppressed by capitalism, are in a
position to destroy the Army’s subordination to bourgeois commanders and
really merge the proletariat with the Army; only the Soviets can
effectively arm the proletariat and disarm the bourgeoisie. Unless this
is done, the victory of socialism is impossible.

18. The Soviet organization of the state is suited to the leading role
of the proletariat as a class most concentrated and enlightened by
capitalism. The experience of all revolutions and all movements of the
oppressed classes, the experience of the world Socialist movement
teaches us that only the proletariat is in a position to unite and lead
the scattered and backward sections of the working and exploited
population.

19. Only the Soviet government of the state can really affect the
immediate breakup and total destruction of the old, i.e., bourgeois,
bureaucratic and judicial machinery, which has been, and has inevitably
had to be, retained under capitalism even in the most democratic
republics, and which is, in actual fact, the greatest obstacle to the
practical implementation of democracy for the workers and working people
generally. The Paris Commune took the first epoch making step along this
path. The Soviet system has taken the second.

20. Destruction of state power is the aim set by all Socialists,
including Marx above all. Genuine democracy, i.e., Liberty and equality,
is unrealizable unless this aim is achieved. But it’s practical
achievement as possible only through Soviet, or proletarian, democracy,
for by enlisting the mass organizations of the working people in
constant and unfailing participation in the administration of the state,
it immediately begins to prepare the complete withering away of any
state.

21. The complete bankruptcy of the Socialists who assembled in Berne,
their complete failure to understand the new, i.e., proletarian,
democracy, is especially apparent from the following. On February 10,
1919, Branting delivered the concluding speech at the International
Conference of the yellow International in Berne. In Berlin, on February
11, 1919, Die Freiheit, the paper of the International’s affiliates,
published an appeal from the party of “Independence” to the proletariat.
The appeal acknowledged the bourgeois character of the Scheidemann
government, rebuked it for wanting to abolish the Soviets, which are
described as _Träger und Schutzer der Revolution_ — vehicles and
guardians of the revolution—and proposed that the Soviets be legalized,
invested with government authority and given the right to suspend the
operation of National Assembly decisions pending a popular referendum.

That proposal indicates the complete ideological bankruptcy of the
theorists who defend democracy and failed to see its bourgeois
character. This ludicrous attempt to combine the Soviet system, i.e.,
proletarian dictatorship, with the National Assembly, i.e. bourgeois
dictatorship, utterly exposes the paucity of thought of the yellow
Socialists and Social-Democrats, their reactionary petty-bourgeois
political outlook, and their cowardly concessions to the irresistible
growing strength of the new, proletarian democracy.

22. From a class standpoint, the Berne yellow International majority,
which did not dare to adopt a formal resolution out of fear of the mass
of workers, was right in condemning Bolshevism. This majority is in full
agreement with the Russian Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, and
the Sheidemanns in Germany. In complaining of persecution by the
Bolsheviks, the Russian Mensheviks and Socialist revolutionaries try to
conceal the fact that they are persecuted for participating in the Civil
War on the side of the bourgeoisie against the proletariat. Similarly,
the Sheidemanns and their party have already demonstrated in Germany
that they, too, are participating in the Civil War on the side of the
bourgeoisie against the workers.

It is therefore quite natural that the Berne yellow International
majority should be in favor of condemning the Bolsheviks. This was not
an expression of defense of “pure democracy", but of the self defense of
people who know and feel that in the Civil War they stand with the
bourgeoisie against the proletariat.

That is why, from the class point of view, the decision of the yellow
International majority must be considered correct. The proletariat must
not fear the truth, it must face it squarely and draw all the necessary
political conclusions.

Comrades, I would like to add a word or two to the last two points. I
think that the comrades who are to report to us on the burn Conference
will deal with it in greater detail.

Not a word was said at the Berne Conference about the significance of
Soviet power. We in Russia have been discussing this question for two
years now. At our Party Conference in April 1917, we raised the
following question, theoretically and politically: “What is Soviet
power, what is its substance and what is its historical significance?”
We have been discussing it for almost two years. And at our [Seventh]
Party Congress we adopted a resolution on it.

On February 11 the Berlin _Die Freiheit_ published an appeal to the
German proletariat signed not only by the leaders of the Independent
Social Democratic Party of Germany, but also by all members of the
Independent Social Democratic group in the Reichstag. In August 1918,
Kautsky, one of the leading theorists of these Independents, wrote a
pamphlet entitled _The Dictatorship of the Proletariat,_ in which he
declared that he was a supporter of democracy _and_ of Soviet bodies,
but that the Soviets must be bodies merely of an economic character and
that they must not by any means be recognized as state organizations.
Kautsky says the same thing in _Die Freiheit_ of November 11 and January
12. On February 9, an article appeared by Rudolf Hilferding, who is also
regarded as one of the leading and authoritative theorists of the Second
International, in which he proposed that the Soviet system be united
with the National Assembly juridically, by state legislation. That was
on February 9. On February 11 this proposal was adopted by the whole of
the Independent Party and published in the form of an appeal.

There is vacillation again, despite the fact that the National Assembly
already exists, even after “pure democracy” has been embodied in
reality, after the leading theorists of the Independent Social
Democratic Party have declared that the Soviet organizations must not be
state organizations! This proves that these gentlemen really understand
nothing about the new movement and about its conditions of struggle. But
it goes to prove something else, namely, that there must be conditions,
causes, for this vacillation! When, after all these events, after nearly
two years of victorious revolution in Russia, we are offered resolutions
like those adopted at the Berne Conference, which say nothing about the
Soviets and their significance, about which not a single delegate
uttered a single word, we have a perfect right to say that all these
gentlemen are dead to us as Socialists and theorists.

However, comrades, from the practical side, from the political point of
view, the fact that these Independents, who in theory and on principle
have been opposed to these state organizations, suddenly making the
stupid proposal to “peacefully” unite the National Assembly with the
Soviet system, i.e., to unite the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie with
the dictatorship of the proletariat, shows that a great change is taking
place among the masses. We see that the Independents are all bankrupt in
the Socialist and theoretical sense and that an enormous change is
taking place among the masses. The backward masses among the German
workers are coming to us, have come to us! So, the significance of the
Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany, the best section of the
Berne Conference, is nil from the theoretical and Socialist standpoint.
Still, it has some significance, which is that these waverers serve as
an index to us of the mood of the backward sections of the proletariat.
This, in my opinion, is a great historical significance of this
Conference. We experienced something of the kind in our own revolution.
Our Mensheviks traversed almost exactly the same path as that of the
theorists of the Independents in Germany. At first, when they had a
majority in the Soviets, they were in favor of the Soviets. All we heard
then was: “Long live the Soviets!", “For the Soviets!", “The Soviets are
revolutionary democracy!” When, however, we Bolsheviks secured a
majority in the Soviets, they changed their tune; they said: the Soviets
must not exist side-by-side with the Constituent Assembly. And various
Mensheviks theorists made practically the same proposals, like the one
to unite the Soviet system with the Constituent Assembly and to
incorporate the Soviets into the state structure. Once again it is here
revealed that the general course of the proletarian revolution is the
same throughout the world. First the spontaneous formation of Soviets,
then their spread and development, and then the appearance of the
practical problem: Soviets, or National Assembly, or Constituent
Assembly, or the bourgeois parliamentary system; utter confusion among
the leaders, and finally—the proletarian revolution. But I think we
should not present the problem in this way after nearly two years of
revolution; we should rather adopt concrete decisions because for us,
and particularly for the majority of the West European countries,
spreading of the Soviet system is a most important task.

I would like to quote here just one Mensheviks resolution. I asked
Comrade Obolensky to translate it into German. He promised to do so but,
unfortunately, he is not here. I shall try to render it from memory, as
I have not the full text of it with me.

It is very difficult for a foreigner who has not heard anything about
Bolshevism to arrive at an independent opinion about our controversial
questions. Everything the Bolsheviks assert is challenged by the
Mensheviks, and vice versa. Of course, it cannot be otherwise in the
middle of the struggle, and that is why it is so important that the last
Menshevik Party conference, held in December 1918, adopted the long and
detailed resolution published in full in the Menshevik Gazeta
Pechatnikov. In this resolution the Mensheviks themselves briefly
outline the history of the class struggle and of the Civil War. The
resolution states that they condemn those groups in their Party which
rallied with the propertied classes in the Urals, in the South, in the
Crimea and in Georgia—all these regions are enumerated. Those groups of
the Menshevik party which, in alliance with the propertied classes,
fought against the Soviets are now condemned in the resolution; but the
last point of the resolution also condemns those who joined the
Communists. It follows that the Mensheviks were compelled to admit that
there was no unity in their party, and that its members were either on
the side of the bourgeoisie or on the side of the proletariat. The
majority of the Mensheviks went over to the bourgeoisie and fought
against us during the Civil War. We, of course, persecute Mensheviks, we
even shoot them, when they wage war against us, fight against our Red
Army and shoot our Red commanders. We responded to the bourgeois war
with the proletarian war—there can be no other way. Therefore, from the
political point of view, all this is sheer Menshevik hypocrisy.
Historically, it is incomprehensible how people who have not been
officially certified as mad could talk at the Berne Conference, on the
instructions of the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, about the
Bolsheviks fighting the latter, yet keep silent about their own
struggle, in alliance with the bourgeoisie, against the proletariat.

All of them furiously attack us for persecuting them. This is true. But
they do not say a word about the part they themselves have taken in the
Civil War! I think that I shall have to provide the full text of the
resolution to be recorded in the minutes, and I shall ask the foreign
comrades to study it because it is a historical document in which the
issue is raised correctly and which provides excellent material for
appraising the controversy between the “socialist” trends in Russia. In
between the proletariat and bourgeoisie there is another class of
people, who incline first this way and then the other. This has always
been the case in all revolutions, and it is absolutely impossible in
capitalist society, in which the proletariat and bourgeoisie formed to
hostile camps, for intermediary sections not to exist between them. The
existence of these waverers is historically inevitable, and,
unfortunately, these elements, who do not know themselves on whose side
they will fight tomorrow, will exist for quite some time.

I want to make the practical proposal that a resolution be adopted in
the which three points shall be specifically mentioned.

_First:_ one of the most important tasks confronting the West European
comrades is to explain to the people the meaning, importance and
necessity of the Soviet system. There is a sort of misunderstanding on
this question. Although Kautsky and Hilferding are bankrupt as
theorists, their recent articles in _Die Freiheit_ show that they
correctly reflect the mood of the backward sections of the German
proletariat. The same thing took place in our country: during the first
eight months of the Russian Revolution the question of the Soviet
organization was very much discussed, and the workers did not understand
what the new system was and whether the Soviets could be transformed
into a state machine. In our revolution we advanced along the path of
practice, and not of theory. For example, formally we did not raise the
question of the Constituent Assembly from the theoretical side, and we
did not say we did not recognize the Constituent Assembly. It was only
later, when the Soviet organizations had spread throughout the country
and had captured political power, that we decided to dissolve the
Constituent Assembly. Now we see that in Hungary and Switzerland the
question is much more acute. On the one hand, this is very good: it
gives us the firm conviction that in the West European states the
revolution is advancing more quickly and will yield great victories. On
the other hand, a danger is concealed in it, namely, that the struggle
will be so precipitous that the minds of the mass of workers will not
keep pace with this development. Even now the significance of the Soviet
system is not clear to a large mass on the politically educated German
workers, because they have been trained in the spirit of the
parliamentary system and ingrained with bourgeois prejudices.

_Second:_ About the spread of the Soviet system. When we hear how
quickly the idea of Soviets is spreading in Germany, and even in
Britain, it is very important evidence that the proletarian revolution
will be victorious. Its progress can only be retarded for a short time.
It is quite another thing, however, when Comrades Albert and Platten
tell us that in the rural districts in their countries there are hardly
any Soviets among the farm laborers and small peasants. In Die Rote
Fahne I read in article opposing peasant Soviets, but quite properly
supporting Soviets of farm laborers and of poor peasants. ^([C]) The
bourgeoisie and their lackeys, like Sheidemann and company, have already
issued the slogan of peasant Soviets. All we need, however, is Soviets
of farm laborers and poor peasants. Unfortunately, from the reports of
Comrades Albert, Platten and others, we see that, with the exception of
Hungary, very little is being done to spread the Soviet system in the
countryside. In this, perhaps, lies the real and quite serious danger
threatening the achievement of certain victory by the German
proletariat. Victory can only be considered assured when not only the
German workers, but also the rural proletarians are organized, and
organized not as before—in trade unions and cooperative societies — but
in Soviets. Our victory was made much easier by the fact that in October
1917 we marched with the peasants, with all the peasants. In that sense,
our revolution at that time was a bourgeois revolution. The first step
taken by our proletarian government was to embody in a law promulgated
on October 26 (old-style), 1917, on the next day after the revolution,
the old demands of all the peasants which peasant Soviets and village
assemblies had put forward under Kerensky. That is where our strength
lay; that is why we were able to win the overwhelming majority so
easily. As far as the countryside was concerned, our revolution
continued to be a bourgeois revolution, and only later, after a lapse of
six months, were we compelled within the framework of the state
organization to start the class struggle in the countryside, to
establish Committees of Poor Peasants, of semi-proletarians, in every
village, and to carry on a methodical fight against the rural
bourgeoisie. This was inevitable in Russia owing to the backwardness of
the country. In Western Europe things will proceed differently, and that
is why we must emphasize the absolute necessity of spreading the Soviet
system also to the rural population in proper, perhaps new, forms.

_Third:_ we must say that winning a Communist majority in the Soviets is
the principal task in all countries in which Soviet government is not
yet victorious. Our Resolutions’ Commission discussed this question
yesterday. Perhaps other comrades will express their opinion on it; but
I would like to propose that these three points be adopted as a special
resolution. Of course, we are not in a position to prescribe the path of
development. It is quite likely that the revolution will come very soon
in many West-European countries, but we, as the organized section of the
working-class, as a party, strive and must strive to gain majority in
the Soviets. Then our victory will be assured and no power on Earth will
be able to do anything against the Communist revolution. If we do not,
victory will not be secured so easily, and it will not be durable. And
so, I would like to propose that these three points be adopted as a
special resolution.

Thesis published March 6, 1919 in _Pravda_ No. 51; report first
published in 1920 in the German and in 1921 in the Russian additions of
the minutes of the First Congress of the Communist International.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

Resolution to the Thesis on Bourgeois Democracy and the Dictatorship of the Proletarian

On the basis of these thesis and the reports made by the delegates from
the different countries, the Congress of the Communist International
declares that the chief task of the Communist Parties in all countries
where Soviet government has not yet been established, is as follows:

1) to explain to the broad mass of the workers the historic significance
and the political and historical necessity of the new, proletarian,
democracy which must replace bourgeois democracy and the parliamentary
system;

2) to extend the organization of Soviets among the workers in all
branches of industry, among the soldiers in the Army and the sailors in
the Navy and also among farm laborers and poor peasants;

3) to build a stable Communist majority inside the Soviets.

_Pravda_ No. 54, March 11, 1919 and in the journal _Communist
International_ No. 1, May 1, 1919

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

Concluding Speech at the Closing Session of the Congress March 6

 

That we have been able to gather, despite all the persecution and all
the difficulties created by the police, that we have been able without
any serious differences and in a brief space of time, reach important
decisions on all the vitally urgent questions of the contemporary
revolutionary epoch, we owe to the fact that the proletarian masses of
the whole world, by their action, have brought up these questions in
practice and begun to tackle them.

All we have had to do here has been to record the gains already won by
the people in the process of their revolutionary struggle.

Not only in the East European but also in the West European countries,
not only in the vanquished but also in the victor countries, for example
in Britain, the movement in favor of Soviets is spreading farther and
farther, and this movement is, most assuredly, a movement pursuing the
aim of establishing the new, proletarian democracy. It is the most
significant step towards the dictatorship of the proletariat to, towards
the complete victory of communism.

No matter how the bourgeoisie of the whole world rage, how much they
deport or jail or even kill Spartacists and Bolsheviks—all this will no
longer help. It will only serve to enlighten the masses, help rid them
of the old bourgeois-democratic prejudices and steel them in the
struggle. The victory of the proletarian revolution on a world scale is
assured. The founding of an international Soviet republic is on the way.
( _Stormy Applause._ )

First published in 1920 in the German and a 1921 in the Russian
additions of the minutes of the First Congress of the Communist
International

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Endnotes

^([A]) Most probably, it is not the Birmingham Workers’ Counsel that is
meant here, but the shop stewards committee. It is very likely that the
newspaper which Lenin read contained incorrect information. Speaking at
the First Congress of the Communist International on March 3, 1919, J.
Fineberg, a delegate from the British Communist group, said:

“In industrial areas local workers’ committees were formed, including
representatives of the shop stewards committees, for instance, the Clyde
workers’ committee, London and Sheffield workers’ committees and so on.
The committees served as organizational centers and representatives of
organized labor and localities. For some time the employers in the
government refused to recognize the shop stewards committees, but in the
end they had to enter into negotiations with these unregistered
committees. That Lloyd George agreed to recognize the Birmingham
committee as an economic organization proves the shop stewards
committees had become permanent factors in the British movement. In the
shop stewards committees, workers’ committees and national conferences
of shop stewards committees we have an organization similar to the one
forming the basis of the Soviet republic"

^([B]) Lenin was among those who were elected to the presidium.

^([C]) Lenin refers to Rosa Luxemburg’s article “Der Anfang” ( _The
Beginning_ ), published in _Die Rote Fahne_ No. 3, November 18, 1918.
