

Bay Area Socialist Organizing Committee

Confronting Reality/Learning from the History of Our Movement

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Democratic Centralism

Democratic centralism is the application of Marxist method to the
question of how best to organize to lead the working class in the
revolutionary transformation of society. The principles of democratic
centralism do not provide a standard blueprint for communist
organization, but rather an approach to the process of collective
decision making and collective action that can take a variety of forms,
corresponding to the development of the organization and the changing
demands of the class struggle.

Unfortunately, the development of democratic centralist theory and
practice has been neglected by the communist movement. In our own
country, for example, the New Communist Movement of the 1970s contented
itself with imitating the organizational forms of the Comintern parties
of the 1920s and 1930s, parties that were more highly developed and
operating under vastly different circumstances. This mimicry eventually
produced grotesque parodies of communist parties, complete with central
committees that had nothing to centralize and mass lines that had no
mass base. But not only the imitators were at fault–the models
themselves were flawed.

The “anti-revisionist/anti-dogmatist” movement today is a response to
two failures: the degeneration of most Comintern parties into
revisionism, and the persistent ultra-leftism of most of the
anti-revisionist movement. It is essential that we address the errors in
theoretical practice and political line that marked these failures. But
we must also examine the connection between these parties’ deviations on
organizational line and their inability to maintain a revolutionary
political line on other questions.

Our task today is to recover democratic centralist theory from dogmatist
distortions, and to develop that theory further, based on a critical
appraisal of the experience of the communist movement. This task is in
turn an integral part of the struggle to develop a general line for the
U.S. communist movement, a line that must inevitably address the issue
of communist organization.

The Principles of Democratic Centralism

Democratic centralism is a method of organization that embodies two
elements, democracy and centralism, in an ever-changing dialectical
relationship of struggle and unity. Thus, there is no formula for the
“correct” proportions of democracy and centralism. Instead, communists
must determine the synthesis of the two that enables their organizations
to provide coherent and decisive leadership to the working class.

The democratic aspect of democratic centralism ensures effective
decision making. It includes thorough discussion of political questions,
full airing of minority viewpoints, collective decision making or
periodic review of delegated decisions, reports from the members on
their work and analyses, provisions for initiatives from members, and
criticism of all aspects of political, organizational, and theoretical
practice. The democratic practice of the organization rests on the
principle that collective decisions made by majority vote after a full,
informed, and frank discussion are more likely to reflect the interests
of the working class than decisions made without such a discussion.

Centralism is necessary to ensure unity of action in carrying out the
organization’s decisions, to provide strategic and tactical flexibility
in dealing with the highly centralized bourgeois state, and to create
the basis in social practice for evaluating the organization’s line.
Centralism includes leadership at all levels summing up the ideas and
experience of the membership, drawing up proposals for the organization
to consider, presenting political arguments for the positions it
recommends, implementing policy, and responding decisively to guide the
organization and the working class through the twists and turns of the
struggle.

However, it is the unity of democracy and centralism that guides us, and
it is essential to understand the interdependence of democracy and
centralism. Without democracy, the leadership lacks accurate information
about the actual unfolding of the class struggle, and especially about
the needs and capabilities of the masses. Instead, it must develop
strategy and tactics by applying Marxist theory to its own partial view
of the political situation. But, as Lenin put it, “The actual unfolding
of the class struggle is infinitely richer than the most advanced
theory.” Democracy means tapping the creativity and experience of many
people to make sure that the organization’s line corresponds to the real
development of the class struggle in a scientific way.

On the other hand, without centralism the experiences of the party’s
members and of the masses would remain scattered. The organization would
be unable to translate its knowledge and experience into a material
force. Thus, there can be no democracy without centralism, and no
centralism without democracy.

But while democracy and centralism support each other, there is always a
tension between them as well. Does everyone need to discuss every
decision? When has discussion gone on long enough and become
unproductive? How should leaders encourage and respond to criticism from
members? How can minority views be respected? When is it appropriate to
reevaluate a decision? When should the organization change its structure
or practices in response to internal or external changes? These kinds of
questions are faced constantly by revolutionary political groups at all
stages of development.

From this basic analysis we can draw a number of conclusions about what
a communist organization requires to/make democratic centralism work:
• POLITICAL UNITY. Only overall political unity can stimulate
individuals to make the commitment necessary to participate in a
communist organization, or motivate a minority to subordinate itself to
carry out the proposals of the majority. The degree of unity required
for communist organization depends on the development of the communists
and the nature of their political tasks: there is no one “correct” level
of unity. As we argue further in our paper on party building, attempts
to enforce organizational consolidation in the absence of political
unity on basic tasks can only lead to splits and the proliferation of
sterile sects.
• CADRE DEVELOPMENT. Democratic centralism requires that members have a
firm, critical, and individual grasp of Marxist theory and practice. If
too many members lack these abilities, the party will lack that dialogue
between members and leaders, base and center, party and masses, that is
essential to democratic centralist decision making, practice, and
evaluation.
• POLITICAL LEADERSHIP. Communist leadership has the responsibility of
guiding the organization’s work through the process of
theory-plan-practice-summation. Important at all times, the role of
leadership takes on particular importance in periods of revolutionary
crisis or repression. Its work therefore requires a high degree of
theoretical and practical experience and mature political judgment. It
requires further an ability to lead, not simply command, the
organization, and through it, the masses. Also important is the
educational role of leadership in helping to develop new leaders from
among the members, and increasing the theoretical and practical
capabilities of the membership in general.
• CRITICISM AND SELF-CRITICISM. Changing conditions, incorrect political
line, and mistakes in implementing line or in style of work are all
inevitable and require regular summation and reevaluation of work.
Mistakes will be more or less serious, more or less harmful to the
movement–but the failure to examine and correct errors is even more
serious and harmful. To make democratic centralism work, criticism and
self-criticism must be practiced throughout the organization. Leaders
and members must learn to assess honestly the strengths and weaknesses
of both individuals and the organization as a whole. Equally important,
this dialogue of criticism and self-criticism must be practiced not only
within the organization, but between the organization and the masses.
Attempts to place the party above the criticism of the masses have taken
several forms. Some have claimed that “the party is always right because
Marxism-Leninism is a science.” Others have tried to deny that their
organization has changed its line, or have refused to explain its
reasons for doing so. Such attempts to mystify communist work deceive no
one, and have no place in serious Marxist practice. The party and the
working class can only win by transforming themselves in the process of
transforming society. Neither aspect of the revolution can succeed
without the practice of serious criticism and self-criticism.

Problems of Democratic Centralism

In the decades since the founding of the Bolshevik Party and of the
Comintern, the communist movement has gained enormous experience in
applying democratic centralism. However, this practice has been little
examined; errors have been persisted in, and even extolled, and problems
have been ignored or explained away. This section examines some of the
mistakes and problems that have appeared in the efforts of communists to
practice democratic centralism.

Monolithic Unity

We argued above that overall political unity was essential to the
practice of democratic centralism. But “political unity” has often been
interpreted in the communist movement to mean ’unanimity.’ The key error
in communist organizations has been an insistence on monolithic unity of
thought throughout the organization: many other errors either flow from
this view, or are closely connected to it.

Both communist and bourgeois observers agree that the Bolshevik Party
under Lenin’s leadership was a lively organization, marked by both sharp
political struggle and by a disciplined commitment to united action.
However, during the 1920s it became more and more the norm to insist
that unity of action required unity of thought. This trend was a
response by the CPSU to the dangers of civil war, foreign intervention,
and sharp class struggle; it was generalized throughout the world
communist movement through the CPSU’s leadership of the Communist
International.

This emphasis on uniformity of thought is wrong for several reasons. It
runs counter to the basic view of dialectical materialism on the
universality of contradiction by suggesting that contradiction exists
everywhere–except within communist parties. A more accurate summation is
that of Mao Zedong: “Where there is no disagreement, there is no life.”
Struggle over the formulation of theory and the evaluation of practice
is essential to the development of any science, in particular
Marxism-Leninism. Without this democratic debate–the clash of differing
experiences and opinions–serious evaluation of political line or work on
either the organizational or individual level becomes impossible. Few
people would claim that a perfect communist party is possible–yet many
have implicitly made this claim by arguing that communist parties can do
without the powerful corrective practice of criticism and debate, or
have paid only lip service to that need. “It will damage party unity,”
they protest. But the unity of a party that is incapable of correcting
its errors is worth very little to the working class; sooner or later
its errors will overwhelm it, no matter how promising its beginning.

The insistence on unity of thought thus stifles the organization’s life.
Who will admit to disagreements with leadership’s policies or make
serious criticisms or self-criticisms when frankness might invite
disciplinary action or expulsion? Those who suppress their objections or
deny their own perceptions of political reality are forced to adopt a
sort of dogmatism in order to be able to function at all. Many of the
most capable people–those most able to find their political bearings
independently–eventually leave the organization. The “revolving door”
memberships of many anti-revisionist groups result at least in part from
this sort of practice.

This emphasis on unity of thought seems to rest on two points. First,
people fear that frank debate will inevitably turn into factionalism,
thus destroying the organization’s unity. This question is a complicated
one, which we discuss separately below. The second reason runs something
like this: Unity of action is more important than being right; better
that the organization is wrong than that the leadership representing
that unity is questioned. This reasoning makes unity of action an end in
itself, divorced from the idea of scientific mass practice; the
organization itself, and not its political tasks and goals have become
primary. This position represents bourgeois concepts of centralism,
taken over from our experience within bourgeois society, for example in
industry and the military. These bourgeois positions must not be
confused with the proletarian concept of centralism.

Commandism

The discouragement of independent thinking and discussion in the party
leads to an overdependence on leadership. We have noted the crucial role
of organizational leadership. Yet if only officially sanctioned ideas
have a place in the party, it can quickly develop a bureaucratic spirit:
leaders command, members become “employees.” (“Don’t ask me to take any
responsibility; I just work here.”) Commandist parties quickly tend
toward dogmatism because the cadres will not or cannot take
responsibility to apply the organization’s line in an intelligent way to
the specific circumstances they face. Even though the members of the
organization may discuss how to apply the line, their discussions cannot
get very far–because applying a political line in a concrete situation
requires dynamic understanding rather than dogmatic memorization. In
this atmosphere members avoid reporting problems or failures for fear of
being thought disloyal or defeatist. Ironically, then, commandism
subverts the very effectiveness that it verbally exalts, for if the
membership is passive the leadership can neither correctly apply the
line nor evaluate it.

In our movement, commandism has often reflected the leadership’s
mistrust of the members (not to mention their mistrust of the masses)
because of the members’ low level of political development. Yet
commandism is not a cure for uneven political development; it is a
prescription for continuing it. Commandism can never result in members
gaining that critical grasp of Marxism-Leninism necessary to develop
communist leaders and cadre.

Is Idol Worship the Answer?

In its extreme form, this error can lead to the development of
personality cults. Marxists have always criticized the “great man”
theory of history–but have sometimes acted as if they thought it were
true. Readers may remember seeing articles or works of art attributing
all successes to Stalin or Mao, comparing them with the sun rising in
the east, and so forth. Such cults are a long way from the Marxist
position that “the masses make history.”

Typically, cults have been promoted to gain mass support for
policies–correct or not–that might not be forthcoming due to lack of
political development or disagreements. As such, personality cults are a
sign of political weakness, not strength.

Lack of Leadership Accountability

From ultra-centralism flow a number of errors based on the lack of
leadership accountability. For example, substantive political discussion
in many parties takes place only at the party’s highest levels. While
disagreements may exist in top leadership bodies, they remain unknown to
the membership since the minority is forbidden to take its case to the
members. As a corollary to this, party congresses, which should be
forums for consideration of minority reports, become instead dull,
rubber-stamp affairs without political significance. The party congress
becomes effectively subordinated to the leadership, even though in
democratic centralist theory it should be the highest party authority,
the means through which leaders can be held accountable by the members.
This lack of accountability may also explain, in part, why many
communist leaders have retained their posts long after they have lost
their effectiveness, often becoming isolated from the membership and
from the masses.

Ultra-democracy

The tendency to correct the problems of over-centralism through
ultra-democracy is a secondary one in our movement, but worth
mentioning. Ultra-democracy responds to uneven development by negating
the role of leadership, and tries to prevent arbitrary decision making
by attempting to arrive at consensus on every issue. (In its insistence
on unanimity, ultra-democracy shares a basic assumption with the
proponents of monolithic unity.) Ultra-democracy fails on several
counts. Democracy is not primarily a forum for free speech, but a
decisionmaking process. Ultra-democratic organizations often find it
difficult to make any decisions at all, thus actually frustrating the
majority rule they are supposed to uphold. In other cases, they move so
slowly that they are unable to test their decisions in practice.
Finally, when leadership is not openly acknowledged, it operates
unofficially and informally, so that the members have no effective way
to hold it responsible. For the most part, ultra-democratic
organizations turn out to be neither effective nor democratic.

The Question of Tendencies and Factions

The principles of democratic centralism imply the right of minorities to
raise their views in a constructive manner. This means that members with
minority views should have the chance to meet together or communicate
with each other in developing those views to present to the
organization. Without this foundation of organizational democracy,
leadership would have a monopoly on presenting information, proposals,
and evaluations to the organization. The absence of serious alternatives
would cripple the organization’s ability to evaluate political line,
rectify errors, or hold leadership accountable. There can, of course, be
no permanent special interest of a tendency separate from the purpose of
the Marxist-Leninist organization itself, because the party reflects the
interests of the class as a whole. But contradictions within the working
class are necessarily reflected in the party–and this is both legitimate
and inevitable.

We apply the term tendency to those formations that seek to struggle
within the organization for a change in political line, practice, or
leadership. Although tendencies must be able to organize to be able to
carry on their side of the debate within the party, their members
continue to work under the discipline of the organization and have
overall unity with it.

Similarly, there may at times be a need for separate caucuses of racial
and national minority members, women, and gay people. These formations
may be needed for two reasons. They allow the specially oppressed
members to struggle more effectively against pressures from bourgeois
society that might lead the organization to drop or soft pedal their
special demands, demands that are crucial to the long-term project of
uniting the working class. Second, these caucuses can further the fight
against the persistent reassertion of racist, sexist, or heterosexist
ideology within the organization.

On the other hand, factions are groupings that have fundamental
differences with an organization’s political line, and which have their
own organizational discipline apart from and above that of the
organization as a whole. Clearly, the continued existence of such a
parallel leading center undermines the organization’s unity of action
and degrades its decision-making process. In such a case, the
organization’s leadership must take the initiative to address the issues
dividing the organization, striving to resolve the differences and
preserve the unity of the organization, or to split the organization in
as principled a manner as is possible.

It will be difficult in practice to judge when a tendency is
strengthening the organization and when it is becoming a permanent,
competing center or special interest group. Since these formations will
often be critical of leadership, leaders may react defensively and see
them as annoying and destructive. The key to the correct conclusion of
these struggles will be a leadership able to act on behalf of the whole
organization and informed and independent cadre who are not afraid to
listen to criticism of leadership and who are able to judge whether
criticisms are right or wrong.

Debates between tendencies must be based on a desire to build the entire
organization and with a commitment to united action once a decision has
been made. It is this attitude that distinguishes a healthy struggle
that helps the organization develop from a destructive one that descends
into factional intrigue, whether on the part of a minority or on the
part of leadership operating as a faction. A sectarian attitude of
“smashing the opposition” through distortion or bureaucratic
manipulation prevents objective examination of different political lines
and makes united action more difficult to achieve.

Democratic Centralism in Today’s Movement

In any period, the synthesis of democracy and centralism depends on
several factors: the level of development of the communists, the nature
of their tasks and their relationship to the masses, set in the context
of the state of the class struggle, the development of the mass
movements, their level of class consciousness, etc. Since all these
elements can change rapidly, communists must be able to quickly alter
not only their organization’s strategy and tactics, but organizational
forms and practices.

The communist movement has usually endorsed this concept, but in
practice, communist organizations have often been structurally static,
as though there were some abstract model of communist organization that
was always appropriate. For ultra-left groups, this organizational model
has often been a highly centralized, semi-military one, based on their
fantasy that revolution is always “just around the corner.” A highly
bureaucratic, centralized form also suits revisionist organizations,
because it gives the leadership ample means to stifle militant pressures
from the base. Part of our own movement has attempted to imitate its
favorite periods of Bolshevik or CPUSA history. Others have made _What
Is To Be Done?_ their organizational bible, isolating it in time and
space to universalize it–thus making a dogma of Lenin’s thought at one
moment in its development.

How different this is from Lenin’s practice! In 1902, in What Is To Be
Done? Lenin argued that only a tightly knit party of professional
revolutionaries led by a semi-secret leadership could evade the Tsarist
police and organize among the working class. Yet a few years later,
during the Revolution of 1905, Lenin argued for opening up the party to
the influence of the masses: the party machinery, created for survival
and for the slow task of bringing revolutionary consciousness and
organization to the workers from “outside” was too conservative and slow
to react in times of mass revolutionary upsurge. Different circumstances
called for a different practice of democratic centralism.

How should we apply democratic centralism today? We think these factors
are central: The communist movement/lacks political unity; it instead
consists of scattered organizations, study groups, and individuals. The
main task of the movement is therefore to develop a general line that
can unite it and guide it toward greater political effectiveness among
the masses. This general line will be the result of political struggle
based on serious theoretical and mass work. We face many problems in
accomplishing this task, however. Both members and leaders of our
movement are at a relatively low level of political development. The
movement itself is quite small, even within a relatively small
revolutionary Left. The movement is thus isolated from the vast majority
of working people, and lacks influence on what workers say, do, and
think. The political situation in the United States today is relatively
stable; bourgeois political democracy is the dominant political form.

In light of these factors, we think that for the forseeable future our
primary emphasis should be on the democratic aspects of democratic
centralism. Unity of action and organizational efficiency should be
developed within the context of the primacy of democracy – freedom of
discussion, frequent reevaluation, and full circulation of information.
This method of organizational practice will give our movement the
maximum opportunity to develop its politics further. Substantially
increasing the degree of centralization and the authority of leadership
can only stunt our political growth unless it is based on a solid
foundation in unity around a scientific general line.

Instead of rushing to centralize the movement, we must work to build the
basis for a healthy centralism. Our movement must consciously develop
its leadership and cadre; we must recognize that leadership abilities do
not come from playing roles or from assuming organizational titles. The
theoretical and practical leadership that we need must grow through
struggle as men and women develop their political abilities and become
respected for their work. Further, leaders must play an active
educational role. To do this, they must lead by example, by fostering
criticism and self-criticism at all levels, and by instituting
organization-wide programs for political development and for learning
practical skills. In addition, since young and inexperienced
organizations are bound to make many mistakes, the ability of leaders to
take responsibility for them openly and learn from them is particularly
important in this period.

