Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



WHERE DO CORRECT IDEAS COME FROM?


_May 1963_

[This passage is from the “_Draft Decision of the Central Committee of
the Chinese Communist Party on Certain Problems in Our Present Rural
Work_”, which was drawn up under the direction of Comrade Mao Tse-tung.
The passage was written by Comrade Mao Tse-tung himself.]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Where do correct ideas come from? Do they drop from the skies? No. Are
they innate in the mind? No. They come from social practice, and from it
alone; they come from three kinds of social practice, the struggle for
production, the class struggle and scientific experiment. It is man’s
social being that determines his thinking. Once the correct ideas
characteristic of the advanced class are grasped by the masses, these
ideas turn into a material force which changes society and changes the
world. In their social practice, men engage in various kinds of struggle
and gain rich experience, both from their successes and from their
failures. Countless phenomena of the objective external world are
reflected in a man’s brain through his five sense organs  —  the organs
of sight, hearing, smell, taste and touch. At first, knowledge is
perceptual. The leap to conceptual knowledge, i.e., to ideas, occurs
when sufficient perceptual knowledge is accumulated. This is one process
in cognition. It is the first stage in the whole process of cognition,
the stage leading from objective matter to subjective consciousness from
existence to ideas. Whether or not one’s consciousness or ideas
(including theories, policies, plans or measures) do correctly reflect
the laws of the objective external world is not yet proved at this
stage, in which it is not yet possible to ascertain whether they are
correct or not. Then comes the second stage in the process of cognition,
the stage leading from consciousness back to matter, from ideas back to
existence, in which the knowledge gained in the first stage is applied
in social practice to ascertain whether the theories, policies, plans or
measures meet with the anticipated success. Generally speaking, those
that succeed are correct and those that fail are incorrect, and this is
especially true of man’s struggle with nature. In social struggle, the
forces representing the advanced class sometimes suffer defeat not
because their ideas are incorrect ! but because, in the balance of
forces engaged in struggle, they are not as powerful for the time being
as the forces of reaction; they are therefore temporarily defeated, but
they are bound to triumph sooner or later. Man’s knowledge makes another
leap through the test of practice. This leap is more important than the
previous one. For it is this leap alone that can prove the correctness
or incorrectness of the first leap in cognition, i.e., of the ideas,
theories, policies, plans or measures formulated in the course of
reflecting the objective external world. There is no other way of
testing truth. Furthermore, the one and only purpose of the proletariat
in knowing the world is to change it. Often, correct knowledge can be
arrived at only after many repetitions of the process leading from
matter to consciousness and then back to matter, that is, leading from
practice to knowledge and then back to practice. Such is the Marxist
theory of knowledge, the dialectical materialist theory of knowledge.
Among our comrades there are many who do not yet understand this theory
of knowledge. When asked the sources of their ideas, opinions, policies,
methods, plans and conclusions, eloquent speeches and long articles they
consider the questions strange and cannot answer it. Nor do they
comprehend that matter, can be transformed into consciousness and
consciousness into matter, although such leaps are phenomena of everyday
life. It is therefore necessary to educate our comrades in the
dialectical materialist theory of knowledge, so that they can orientate
their thinking correctly, become good at investigation and study and at
summing up experience, overcome difficulties, commit fewer mistakes, do
their work better, and struggle hard so as to build China into a great
and powerful socialist country and help the broad masses of the
oppressed and exploited throughout the world in fulfillment of our great
internationalist duty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

Save
