Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



ON THE PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC DICTATORSHIP


IN COMMEMORATION OF THE TWENTY-EIGHTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY
OF CHINA

_June 30, 1949_

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The first of July 1949 marks the fact that the Communist Party of China
has already lived through twenty-eight years. Like a man, a political
party has its childhood, youth, manhood and old age. The Communist Party
of China is no longer a child or a lad in his teens but has become an
adult. When a man reaches old age, he will die; the same is true of a
party. When classes disappear, all instruments of class struggle --
parties and the state machinery -- will lose their function, cease to be
necessary, therefore gradually wither away and end their historical
mission; and human society will move to a higher stage. We are the
opposite of the political parties of the bourgeoisie. They are afraid to
speak of the extinction of classes, state power and parties. We, on the
contrary, declare openly that we are striving hard to create the very
conditions which will bring about their extinction. The leadership of
the Communist Party and the state power of the people's dictatorship are
such conditions. Anyone who does not recognize this truth is no
communist. Young comrades who have not studied Marxism-Leninism and have
only recently joined the Party may not yet understand this truth. They
must understand it -- only then can they have a correct world outlook.
They must understand that the road to the abolition of classes, to the
abolition of state power and to the abolition of parties is the road all
mankind must take; it is only a question of time and conditions.
Communists the world over are wiser than the bourgeoisie, they
understand the laws governing the existence and development of things,
they understand dialectics and they can see farther. The bourgeoisie
does not welcome this truth because it does not want to be overthrown.
To be overthrown is painful and is unbearable to contemplate for those
overthrown, for example, for the Kuomintang reactionaries whom we are
now overthrowing and for Japanese imperialism which we together with
other peoples overthrew some time ago. But for the working class, the
labouring people and the Communist Party the question is not one of
being overthrown, but of working hard to create the conditions in which
classes, state power and political parties will die out very naturally
and mankind will enter the realm of Great Harmony.[1] We have mentioned
in passing the long-range perspective of human progress in order to
explain clearly the problems we are about to discuss.

As everyone knows, our Party passed through these twenty-eight years not
in peace but amid hardships, for we had to fight enemies, both foreign
and domestic, both inside and outside the Party. We thank Marx, Engels,
Lenin and Stalin for giving us a weapon. This weapon is not a
machine-gun, but Marxism-Leninism.

In his book _"Left-Wing" Communism, an Infantile Disorder_ written in
1920, Lenin described the quest of the Russians for revolutionary
theory.[2] Only after several decades of hardship and suffering did the
Russians find Marxism. Many things in China were the same as, or similar
to, those in Russia before the October Revolution. There was the same
feudal oppression. There was similar economic and cultural backwardness.
Both countries were backward, China even more so. In both countries
alike, for the sake of national regeneration progressives braved hard
and bitter struggles in their quest for revolutionary truth.

From the time of China's defeat in the Opium War of 1840,[3] Chinese
progressives went through untold hardships in their quest for truth from
the Western countries. Hung Hsiu-chuan,[4] Kang Yu-wei,[5] Yen Fu[6] and
Sun Yat-sen were representative of those who had looked to the West for
truth before the Communist Party of China was born. Chinese who then
sought progress would read any book containing the new knowledge from
the West. The number of students sent to Japan, Britain, the United
States, France and Germany was amazing. At home, the imperial
examinations[7] were abolished and modern schools sprang up like bamboo
shoots after a spring rain; every effort was made to learn from the
West. In my youth, I too engaged in such studies. They represented the
culture of Western bourgeois democracy, including the social theories
and natural sciences of that period, and they were called "the new
learning" in contrast to Chinese feudal culture, which was called "the
old learning". For quite a long time, those who had acquired the new
learning felt confident that it would save China, and very few of them
had any doubts on this score, as the adherents of the old learning had.
Only modernization could save China, only learning from foreign
countries could modernize China. Among the foreign countries, only the
Western capitalist countries were then progressive, as they had
successfully built modern bourgeois states. The Japanese had been
successful in learning from the West, and the Chinese also wished to
learn from the Japanese. The Chinese in those days regarded Russia as
backward, and few wanted to learn from her. That was how the Chinese
tried to learn from foreign countries in the period from the 1840s to
the beginning of the 20th century.

Imperialist aggression shattered the fond dreams of the Chinese about
learning from the West. It was very odd -- why were the teachers always
committing aggression against their pupil? The Chinese learned a good
deal from the West, but they could not make it work and were never able
to realize their ideals. Their repeated struggles, including such a
country-wide movement as the Revolution of 1911,[8] all ended in
failure. Day by day, conditions in the country got worse, and life was
made impossible. Doubts arose, increased and deepened. World War I shook
the whole globe. The Russians made the October Revolution and created
the world's first socialist state. Under the leadership of Lenin and
Stalin, the revolutionary energy of the great proletariat and labouring
people of Russia, hitherto latent and unseen by foreigners, suddenly
erupted like a volcano, and the Chinese and all mankind began to see the
Russians in a new light. Then, and only then, did the Chinese enter an
entirely new era in their thinking and their life. They found
Marxism-Leninism, the universally applicable truth, and the face of
China began to change.

It was through the Russians that the Chinese found Marxism. Before the
October Revolution, the Chinese were not only ignorant of Lenin and
Stalin, they did not even know of Marx and Engels. The salvoes of the
October Revolution brought us Marxism-Leninism. The October Revolution
helped progressives in China, as throughout the world, to adopt the
proletarian world outlook as the instrument for studying a nation's
destiny and considering anew their own problems. Follow the path of the
Russians -- that was their conclusion. In 1919, the May 4th Movement
took place in China. In 1921, the Communist Party of China was founded.
Sun Yat-sen, in the depths of despair, came across the October
Revolution and the Communist Party of China. He welcomed the October
Revolution, welcomed Russian help to the Chinese and welcomed
co-operation of the Communist Party of China. Then Sun Yat-sen died and
Chiang Kai-shek rose to power. Over a long period of twenty-two years,
Chiang Kai-shek dragged China into ever more hopeless straits. In this
period, during the anti-fascist Second World War in which the Soviet
Union was the main force, three big imperialist powers were knocked out,
while two others were weakened. In the whole world only one big
imperialist power, the United States of America, remained uninjured. But
the United States faced a grave domestic crisis. It wanted to enslave
the whole world; it supplied arms to help Chiang Kai-shek slaughter
several million Chinese. Under the leadership of the Communist Party of
China, the Chinese people, after driving out Japanese imperialism, waged
the People's War of Liberation for three years and have basically won
victory.

Thus Western bourgeois civilization, bourgeois democracy and the plan
for a bourgeois republic have all gone bankrupt in the eyes of the
Chinese people. Bourgeois democracy has given way to people's democracy
under the leadership of the working class and the bourgeois republic to
the people's republic. This has made it possible to achieve socialism
and communism through the people's republic, to abolish classes and
enter a world of Great Harmony. Kang Yu-wei wrote _Ta Tung Shu_, or the
_Book of Great Harmony,_ but he did not and could not find the way to
achieve Great Harmony. There are bourgeois republics in foreign lands,
but China cannot have a bourgeois republic because she is a country
suffering under imperialist oppression. The only way is through a
people's republic led by the working class.

All other ways have been tried and failed. Of the people who hankered
after those ways, some have fallen, some have awakened and some are
changing their ideas. Events are developing so swiftly that many feel
the abruptness of the change and the need to learn anew. This state of
mind is understandable and we welcome this worthy desire to learn anew.

The vanguard of the Chinese proletariat learned Marxism-Leninism after
the October Revolution and founded the Communist Party of China. It
entered at once into political struggles and only now, after a tortuous
course of twenty-eight years, has it won basic victory. From our
twenty-eight years' experience we have drawn a conclusion similar to the
one Sun Yat-sen drew in his testament from his "experience of forty
years"; that is, we are deeply convinced that to win victory, "we must
arouse the masses of the people and unite in a common struggle with
those nations of the world which treat us as equals". Sun Yat-sen had a
world outlook different from ours and started from a different class
standpoint in studying and tackling problems; yet, in the 1920s he
reached a conclusion basically the same as ours on the question of how
to struggle against imperialism.

Twenty-four years have passed since Sun Yat-sen's death, and the Chinese
revolution, led by the Communist Party of China, has made tremendous
advances both in theory and practice and has radically changed the face
of China. Up to now the principal and fundamental experience the Chinese
people have gained is twofold:

  (1) Internally, arouse the masses of the people. That is, unite the
  working class, the peasantry, the urban petty bourgeoisie and the
  national bourgeoisie, form a domestic united front under the
  leadership of the working class, and advance from this to the
  establishment of a state which is a people's democratic dictatorship
  under the leadership of the working class and based on the alliance of
  workers and peasants.

  (2) Externally, unite in a common struggle with those nations of the
  world which treat us as equals and unite with the peoples of all
  countries. That is, ally ourselves with the Soviet Union, with the
  People's Democracies and with the proletariat and the broad masses of
  the people in all other countries, and form an international united
  front.

"You are leaning to one side." Exactly. The forty years' experience of
Sun Yat-sen and the twenty-eight years' experience of the Communist
Party have taught us to lean to one side, and we are firmly convinced
that in order to win victory and consolidate it we must lean to one
side. In the light of the experiences accumulated in these forty years
and these twenty-eight years, all Chinese without exception must lean
either to the side of imperialism or to the side of socialism. Sitting
on the fence will not do, nor is there a third road. We oppose the
Chiang Kai-shek reactionaries who lean to the side of imperialism, and
we also oppose the illusions about a third road.

"You are too irritating." We are talking about how to deal with domestic
and foreign reactionaries, the imperialists and their running dogs, not
about how to deal with anyone else. With regard to such reactionaries,
the question of irritating them or not does not arise. Irritated or not
irritated, they will remain the same because they are reactionaries.
Only if we draw a clear line between reactionaries and revolutionaries,
expose the intrigues and plots of the reactionaries, arouse the
vigilance and attention of the revolutionary ranks, heighten our will to
fight and crush the enemy's arrogance can we isolate the reactionaries,
vanquish them or supersede them. We must not show the slightest timidity
before a wild beast. We must learn from Wu Sung[9] on the Chingyang
Ridge. As Wu Sung saw it, the tiger on Chingyang Ridge was a man-eater,
whether irritated or not. Either kill the tiger or be eaten by him --
one or the other.

"We want to do business." Quite right, business will be done. We are
against no one except the domestic and foreign reactionaries who hinder
us from doing business. Everybody should know that it is none other than
the imperialists and their running dogs, the Chiang Kai-shek
reactionaries, who hinder us from doing business and also from
establishing diplomatic relations with foreign countries. When we have
beaten the internal and external reactionaries by uniting all domestic
and international forces, we shall be able to do business and establish
diplomatic relations with all foreign countries on the basis of
equality, mutual benefit and mutual respect for territorial integrity
and sovereignty.

"Victory is possible even without international help." This is a
mistaken idea. In the epoch in which imperialism exists, it is
impossible for a genuine people's revolution to win victory in any
country without various forms of help from the international
revolutionary forces, and even if victory were won, it could not be
consolidated. This was the case with the victory and consolidation of
the great October Revolution, as Lenin and Stalin told us long ago. This
was also the case with the overthrow of the three imperialist powers in
World War II and the establishment of the People's Democracies. And this
is also the case with the present and the future of People's China. Just
imagine! If the Soviet Union had not existed, if there had been no
victory in the anti-fascist Second World War, if Japanese imperialism
had not been defeated, if the People's Democracies had not come into
being, if the oppressed nations of the East were not rising in struggle
and if there were no struggle of the masses of the people against their
reactionary rulers in the United States, Britain, France, Germany,
Italy, Japan and other capitalist countries -- if not for all these in
combination, the international reactionary forces bearing down upon us
would certainly be many times greater than now. In such circumstances,
could we have won victory? Obviously not. And even with victory, there
could be no consolidation. The Chinese people have had more than enough
experience of this kind. This experience was reflected long ago in Sun
Yat-sen's death-bed statement on the necessity of uniting with the
international revolutionary forces.

"We need help from the British and U.S. governments." This, too, is a
naive idea in these times. Would the present rulers of Britain and the
United States, who are imperialists, help a people's state? Why do these
countries do business with us and, supposing they might be willing to
lend us money on terms of mutual benefit in the future, why would they
do so? Because their capitalists want to make money and their bankers
want to earn interest to extricate themselves from their own crisis --
it is not a matter of helping the Chinese people. The Communist Parties
and progressive groups in these countries are urging their governments
to establish trade and even diplomatic relations with us. This is
goodwill, this is help, this cannot be mentioned in the same breath with
the conduct of the bourgeoisie in the same countries. Throughout his
life, Sun Yat-sen appealed countless times to the capitalist countries
for help and got nothing but heartless rebuffs. Only once in his whole
life did Sun Yat-sen receive foreign help, and that was Soviet help. Let
readers refer to Dr. Sun Yat-sen's testament; his earnest advice was not
to look for help from the imperialist countries but to "unite with those
nations of the world which treat us as equals". Dr. Sun had experience;
he had suffered, he had been deceived. We should remember his words and
not allow ourselves to be deceived again. Internationally, we belong to
the side of the anti-imperialist front headed by the Soviet Union, and
so we can turn only to this side for genuine and friendly help, not to
the side of the imperialist front.

"You are dictatorial." My dear sirs, you are right, that is just what we
are. All the experience the Chinese people have accumulated through
several decades teaches us to enforce the people's democratic
dictatorship, that is, to deprive the reactionaries of the right to
speak and let the people alone have that right.

Who are the people? At the present stage in China, they are the working
class, the peasantry, the urban petty bourgeoisie and the national
bourgeoisie. These classes, led by the working class and the Communist
Party, unite to form their own state and elect their own government;
they enforce their dictatorship over the running dogs of imperialism --
the landlord class and bureaucrat-bourgeoisie, as well as the
representatives of those classes, the Kuomintang reactionaries and their
accomplices -- suppress them, allow them only to behave themselves and
not to be unruly in word or deed. If they speak or act in an unruly way,
they will be promptly stopped and punished. Democracy is practiced
within the ranks of the people, who enjoy the rights of freedom of
speech, assembly, association and so on. The right to vote belongs only
to the people, not to the reactionaries. The combination of these two
aspects, democracy for the people and dictatorship over the
reactionaries, is the people's democratic dictatorship.

Why must things be done this way? The reason is quite clear to
everybody. If things were not done this way, the revolution would fail,
the people would suffer, the country would be conquered.

"Don't you want to abolish state power?" Yes, we do, but not right now;
we cannot do it yet. Why? Because imperialism still exists, because
domestic reaction still exists, because classes still exist in our
country. Our present task is to strengthen the people's state apparatus
-- mainly the people's army, the people's police and the people's courts
-- in order to consolidate national defence and protect the people's
interests. Given this condition, China can develop steadily, under the
leadership of the working class and the Communist Party, from an
agricultural into an industrial country and from a new-democratic into a
socialist and communist society, can abolish classes and realize the
Great Harmony. The state apparatus, including the army, the police and
the courts, is the instrument by which one class oppresses another. It
is an instrument for the oppression of antagonistic classes, it is
violence and not "benevolence". "You are not benevolent!" Quite so. We
definitely do not apply a policy of benevolence to the reactionaries and
towards the reactionary activities of the reactionary classes. Our
policy of benevolence is applied only within the ranks of the people,
not beyond them to the reactionaries or to the reactionary activities of
reactionary classes.

The people's state protects the people. Only when the people have such a
state can they educate and remould themselves by democratic methods on a
country-wide scale, with everyone taking part, and shake off the
influence of domestic and foreign reactionaries (which is still very
strong, will survive for a long time and cannot be quickly destroyed),
rid themselves of the bad habits and ideas acquired in the old society,
not allow themselves to be led astray by the reactionaries, and continue
to advance -- to advance towards a socialist and communist society.

Here, the method we employ is democratic, the method of persuasion, not
of compulsion. When anyone among the people breaks the law, he too
should be punished, imprisoned or even sentenced to death; but this is a
matter of a few individual cases, and it differs in principle from the
dictatorship exercised over the reactionaries as a class.

As for the members of the reactionary classes and individual
reactionaries, so long as they do not rebel, sabotage or create trouble
after their political power has been overthrown, land and work will be
given to them as well in order to allow them to live and remould
themselves through labour into new people. If they are not willing to
work, the people's state will compel them to work. Propaganda and
educational work will be done among them too and will be done, moreover,
with as much care and thoroughness as among the captured army officers
in the past. This, too, may be called a "policy of benevolence" if you
like, but it is imposed by us on the members of the enemy classes and
cannot be mentioned in the same breath with the work of self-education
which we carry on within the ranks of the revolutionary people.

Such remoulding of members of the reactionary classes can be
accomplished only by a state of the people's democratic dictatorship
under the leadership of the Communist Party. When it is well done,
China's major exploiting classes, the landlord class and the
bureaucrat-bourgeoisie (the monopoly capitalist class), will be
eliminated for good. There remain the national bourgeoisie; at the
present stage, we can already do a good deal of suitable educational
work with many of them. When the time comes to realize socialism, that
is, to nationalize private enterprise, we shall carry the work of
educating and remoulding them a step further. The people have a powerful
state apparatus in their hands -- there is no need to fear rebellion by
the national bourgeoisie.

The serious problem is the education of the peasantry. The peasant
economy is scattered, and the socialization of agriculture, judging by
the Soviet Union's experience, will require a long time and painstaking
work. Without socialization of agriculture, there can be no complete,
consolidated socialism. The steps to socialize agriculture must be
co-ordinated with the development of a powerful industry having state
enterprise as its backbone.[10] The state of the people's democratic
dictatorship must systematically solve the problems of
industrialization. Since it is not proposed to discuss economic problems
in detail in this article, I shall not go into them further.

In 1924 a famous manifesto was adopted at the Kuomintang's First
National Congress, which Sun Yat-sen himself led and in which Communists
participated. The manifesto stated:

  The so-called democratic system in modern states is usually
  monopolized by the bourgeoisie and has become simply an instrument for
  oppressing the common people. On the other hand, the Kuomintang's
  Principle of Democracy means a democratic system shared by all the
  common people and not privately owned by the few.

Apart from the question of who leads whom, the Principle of Democracy
stated above corresponds as a general political programme to what we
call People's Democracy or New Democracy. A state system which is shared
only by the common people and which the bourgeoisie is not allowed to
own privately -- add to this the leadership of the working class, and we
have the state system of the people's democratic dictatorship.

Chiang Kai-shek betrayed Sun Yat-sen and used the dictatorship of the
bureaucrat-bourgeoisie and the landlord class as an instrument for
oppressing the common people of China. This counter-revolutionary
dictatorship was enforced for twenty-two years and has only now been
overthrown by the common people of China under our leadership.

The foreign reactionaries who accuse us of practicing "dictatorship" or
"totalitarianism" are the very persons who practice it. They practice
the dictatorship or totalitarianism of one class, the bourgeoisie, over
the proletariat and the rest of the people. They are the very persons
Sun Yat-sen spoke of as the bourgeoisie of modern states who oppress the
common people. And it is from these reactionary scoundrels that Chiang
Kai-shek learned his counter-revolutionary dictatorship.

Chu Hsi, a philosopher of the Sung Dynasty, wrote many books and made
many remarks which are now forgotten, but one remark is still
remembered, "Deal with a man as he deals with you." [11] This is just
what we do; we deal with the imperialists and their running dogs, the
Chiang Kai-shek reactionaries, as they deal with us. That is all there
is to it!

Revolutionary dictatorship and counter-revolutionary dictatorship are by
nature opposites, but the former was learned from the latter. Such
learning is very important. If the revolutionary people do not master
this method of ruling over the counter-revolutionary classes, they will
not be able to maintain their state power, domestic and foreign reaction
will overthrow that power and restore its own rule over China, and
disaster will befall the revolutionary people.

The people's democratic dictatorship is based on the alliance of the
working class, the peasantry and the urban petty bourgeoisie, and mainly
on the alliance of the workers and the peasants, because these two
classes comprise 80 to 90 per cent of China's population. These two
classes are the main force in overthrowing imperialism and the
Kuomintang reactionaries. The transition from New Democracy to socialism
also depends mainly upon their alliance.

The people's democratic dictatorship needs the leadership of the working
class. For it is only the working class that is most farsighted, most
selfless and most thoroughly revolutionary. The entire history of
revolution proves that without the leadership of the working class
revolution fails and that with the leadership of the working class
revolution triumphs. In the epoch of imperialism, in no country can any
other class lead any genuine revolution to victory. This is clearly
proved by the fact that the many revolutions led by China's petty
bourgeoisie and national bourgeoisie all failed.

The national bourgeoisie at the present stage is of great importance.
Imperialism, a most ferocious enemy, is still standing alongside us.
China's modern industry still forms a very small proportion of the
national economy. No reliable statistics are available, but it is
estimated, on the basis of certain data, that before the War of
Resistance Against Japan the value of output of modern industry
constituted only about 10 per cent of the total value of output of the
national economy. To counter imperialist oppression and to raise her
backward economy to a higher level, China must utilize all the factors
of urban and rural capitalism that are beneficial and not harmful to the
national economy and the people's livelihood; and we must unite with the
national bourgeoisie in common struggle. Our present policy is to
regulate capitalism, not to destroy it. But the national bourgeoisie
cannot be the leader of the revolution, nor should it have the chief
role in state power. The reason it cannot be the leader of the
revolution and should not have the chief role in state power is that the
social and economic position of the national bourgeoisie determines its
weakness; it lacks foresight and sufficient courage and many of its
members are afraid of the masses.

Sun Yat-sen advocated "arousing the masses of the people" or "giving
assistance to the peasants and workers". But who is to "arouse" them or
"give assistance" to them? Sun Yat-sen had the petty bourgeoisie and the
national bourgeoisie in mind. As a matter of fact, they cannot do so.
Why did forty years of revolution under Sun Yat-sen end in failure?
Because in the epoch of imperialism the petty bourgeoisie and the
national bourgeoisie cannot lead any genuine revolution to victory.

Our twenty-eight years have been quite different. We have had much
valuable experience. A well-disciplined Party armed with the theory of
Marxism-Leninism, using the method of self-criticism and linked with the
masses of the people, an army under the leadership of such a Party; a
united front of all revolutionary classes and all revolutionary groups
under the leadership of such a Party -- these are the three main weapons
with which we have defeated the enemy. They distinguish us from our
predecessors. Relying on them, we have won basic victory. We have
travelled a tortuous road. We have struggled against opportunist
deviations in our Party, both Right and "Left". Whenever we made serious
mistakes on these three matters, the revolution suffered setbacks.
Taught by mistakes and setbacks, we have become wiser and handle our
affairs better. It is hard for any political party or person to avoid
mistakes, but we should make as few as possible. Once a mistake is made,
we should correct it, and the more quickly and thoroughly the better.

To sum up our experience and concentrate it into one point, it is the
people's democratic dictatorship under the leadership of the working
class (through the Communist Party) and based upon the alliance of
workers and peasants. This dictatorship must unite as one with the
international revolutionary forces. This is our formula, our principal
experience, our main programme.

Twenty-eight years of our Party are a long period, in which we have
accomplished only one thing -- we have won basic victory in the
revolutionary war. This calls for celebration, because it is the
people's victory, because it is a victory in a country as large as
China. But we still have much work to do; to use the analogy of a
journey, our past work is only the first step in a long march of ten
thousand _li_. Remnants of the enemy have yet to be wiped out. The
serious task of economic construction lies before us. We shall soon put
aside some of the things we know well and be compelled to do things we
don't know well. This means difficulties. The imperialists reckon that
we will not be able to manage our economy, they are standing by and
looking on, awaiting our failure.

We must overcome difficulties, we must learn what we do not know. We
must learn to do economic work from all who know how, no matter who they
are. We must esteem them as teachers, learning from them respectfully
and conscientiously. We must not pretend to know when we do not know. We
must not put on bureaucratic airs. If we dig into a subject for several
months, for a year or two, for three or five years, we shall eventually
master it. At first some of the Soviet Communists also were not very
good at handling economic matters and the imperialists awaited their
failure too. But the Communist Party of the Soviet Union emerged
victorious and, under the leadership of Lenin and Stalin, it learned not
only how to make the revolution but also how to carry on construction.
It has built a great and splendid socialist state. The Communist Party
of the Soviet Union is our best teacher and we must learn from it. The
situation both at home and abroad is in our favour, we can rely fully on
the weapon of the people's democratic dictatorship, unite the people
throughout the country, the reactionaries excepted, and advance steadily
to our goal.

_NOTES_

1. Also known as the world of Great Harmony. It refers to a society
based on public ownership, free from class exploitation and oppression
-- a lofty ideal long cherished by the Chinese people. Here the realm of
Great Harmony means communist society.

2. See V. 1. Lenin, _"Left-Wing" Communism, an Infantile Disorder,_
Chapter 2. Lenin said: "for nearly half a century -- approximately from
the 'forties to the 'nineties -- advanced thinkers in Russia, under the
oppression of an unparalleled, savage and reactionary tsardom, eagerly
sought for the correct revolutionary theory and followed each and every
'last word' in Europe and America in this sphere with astonishing
diligence and thoroughness. Russia achieved Marxism, the only correct
revolutionary theory, veritably through _suffering,_ by half a century
of unprecedented torment and sacrifice, of unprecedented revolutionary
heroism, incredible energy, devoted searching, study, testing in
practice, disappointment, verification and comparison with European
experience."

3. Faced with the opposition of the Chinese people to her traffic in
opium, Britain sent forces in 1840-42 to invade Kwangtung and other
coastal regions of China under the pretext of protecting trade. The
troops in Kwangtung, led by Lin Tse-hsu, fought a war of resistance.

4. Hung Hsiu-chuan (1814-64), who was born in Kwangtung, was the leader
of a peasant revolutionary war in the middle of the 19th century. In
1851 he led a mass uprising in Kwangsi and proclaimed the establishment
of the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom, which held many provinces and fought
the Ching Dynasty for fourteen years. In 1864 this revolutionary war
failed and Hung Hsiu-chuan committed suicide by poison.

5. Kang Yu-wei (1858-1927), of Nanhai County, Kwangtung Province. In
1895, after China had been defeated by Japanese imperialism in the
previous year, he led thirteen hundred candidates for the third grade in
the imperial examinations at Peking in submitting a "ten thousand word
memorial" to Emperor Kuang Hsu, asking for "constitutional reform and
modernization" and asking that the autocratic monarchy be changed into a
constitutional monarchy. In 1898, in an attempt to introduce reforms,
the emperor promoted Kang Yu-wei together with Tan Sze-tung, Liang
Chi-chao and others to key posts in the government. Later, the Empress
Dowager Tzu Hsi, representing the die-hards, again took power and the
reform movement failed. Kang Yu-wei and Liang Chi-chao fled abroad and
formed the Protect-the-Emperor Party, which became a reactionary
political faction in opposition to the bourgeois and petty bourgeois
revolutionaries represented by Sun Yat-sen. Among Kang's works were
_Forgeries in the Classics of the Confucian Canon, Confucius as a
Reformer,_ and _Ta Tung Shu_ or the _Book of Great Harmony._

6. Yen Fu (1853-1921), of Foochow, Fukien Province, studied at a naval
academy in Britain. After the Sino-Japanese War of 1894, he advocated
constitutional monarchy and reforms to modernize China. His translations
of T. H. Huxley's _Evolution and Ethics,_ Adam Smith's _The Wealth of
Nations,_ J. S. Mill's _System of Logic,_ Montesquieu's _L'Esprit des
Lois,_ and other works were vehicles for the spread of European
bourgeois thought in China.

7. A system of examinations adopted by China's autocratic dynasties. It
was a method used by the feudal ruling class for selecting personnel to
govern the people and also for enticing the intellectuals. The system,
dating from the 7th century, persisted into the early 20th century.

8. The Revolution of 1911 overthrew the autocratic regime of the Ching
Dynasty. On October 10 of that year, a section of the New Army, at the
urging of the revolutionary societies of the bourgeoisie and petty
bourgeoisie, staged an uprising in Wuchang. This was followed by
uprisings in other provinces, and very soon the rule of the Ching
Dynasty crumbled. On January 1, 1912, the Provisional Government of the
Republic of China was set up in Nanking, and Sun Yat-sen was elected
Provisional President. The revolution achieved victory through the
alliance of the bourgeoisie, peasants, workers and urban petty
bourgeoisie. But because the group which led the revolution was
compromising in nature, failed to bring real benefits to the peasants
and yielded to the pressure of imperialism and the feudal forces, state
power fell into the hands of the Northern warlord Yuan Shih-kai, and the
revolution failed.

9. A hero in the novel, _Shui Hu Chuan (Heroes of the Marshes),_ who
killed a tiger with his bare hands on the Chingyang Ridge. This is one
of the most popular episodes in that famous novel.

10. For the relation between the socialization of agriculture and the
industrialization of the country, see _On the Question of Agricultural
Co-operation_ (Sections 7 and 8), a report made by Comrade Mao Tse-tung
on July 31, 1955 at the Conference of the Secretaries of the Provincial,
Municipal and Autonomous Region Committees of the Chinese Communist
Party. In this report Comrade Mao Tse-tung, on the basis of Soviet
experience and our own country's practice, greatly developed the thesis
that socialization of agriculture should proceed in step with socialist
industrialization.

11. The quotation is from Chu Hsi's commentary on the _Confucian
Doctrine of the Mean,_ Chapter 13.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

Save
