
Lenin Internet Archive



“DEMOCRACY” AND DICTATORSHIP


------------------------------------------------------------------------

Written: December 23, 1918
First Published: January 3, 1919 in _Pravda_ No. 2
Source: Lenin Collected Works, Volume 28 (p. 368-72)
Transcription\Markup: Brian Baggins
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive (marxists.org) 2000

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

A few numbers of the Berlin Red Banner and the Vienna Call (Weckruf),
organ of the Communist Party of German Austria, that have reached
Moscow, showed that the traitors to socialism — those who supported the
war of the predatory imperialists — the Scheidemanns and Kautskys,
Austerlitzes and Renners [All who were far right German
Social-Democrats] — are getting the rebuff they deserve from these
genuine representatives of the revolutionary workers of Germany and
Austria. We extend warm greetings to both papers, which epitomise the
vitality and growth of the Third International.

Apparently the chief question of the revolution both in Germany and
Austria now is: Constituent Assembly or Soviet government? The spokesmen
of the bankrupt Second International, all the way from Scheidemann to
Kautsky, stand for the first and describe their stand as defense of
"democracy" (Kautsky has even gone so far as to call it "pure
democracy") as distinct from dictatorship. In the pamphlet _The
Proletarian Revolution and Renegade Kautsky_ , which has just come off
the press in Moscow and Petrograd, I examine Kautsky's views in detail.
I shall try briefly to give the substance of the point at issue, which
has become the question of the day for all the advanced capitalist
countries.

The Scheidemanns and Kautsky's speak about "pure democracy" and
"democracy" in general for the purpose of deceiving the people and
concealing from them the _bourgeois_ character of _present-day_
democracy. Let the bourgeoisie continue to keep the entire apparatus of
state power in their hands, let a handful of exploiters continue to use
the former, bourgeois, state machine! Elections held in such
circumstances are lauded by the bourgeoisie, for very good reasons, as
being "free", "equal", "democratic" and "universal". These words are
designed to conceal the truth, to conceal the fact that the means of
production and political power remain in the hands of the exploiters,
and that therefore real freedom and real equality for the exploited,
that is, for the vast majority of the population, are out of the
question. It is profitable and indispensable for the bourgeoisie to
conceal from the people the _bourgeois_ character of modern democracy,
to picture it as democracy in general or "pure democracy", and the
Scheidemanns and Kautskys, repeating this, _in practice_ abandon the
standpoint of the proletariat and side with the bourgeoisie.

Marx and Engels in their last joint preface to the Communist Manifesto
(in 1872)^([A]) considered it necessary to specifically warn the workers
that the proletariat cannot simply lay hold of the ready-made (that is,
the bourgeois) state machine and wield it for their own purpose, but
that they must smash it, break it up. The renegade Kautsky, who has
written a special pamphlet entitled _dictatorship of the proletariat,_
concealed from the workers this most important Marxist truth, utterly
distorted Marxism, and, quite obviously, the praise which Scheidemann
and Co. showered on the pamphlet was fully merited as praise by agents
of the bourgeoisie for one switching to the side of the bourgeoisie.

It is sheer mockery of the working and exploited people to speak of pure
democracy, of democracy in general, of equality, freedom and universal
rights when the workers and all working people are ill-fed, ill-clad,
ruined and worn out, not only as a result of capitalist wage slavery,
but as a consequence of four years of predatory war, while the
capitalists and profiteers remain in possession of the "property"
usurped by them and the "ready-made" apparatus of state power. This is
tantamount to trampling on the basic truths of Marxism which has taught
the workers: you must take advantage of bourgeois democracy which,
compared with feudalism, represents a great historical advance, but not
for one minute must you forget the bourgeois character of this
"democracy", it's historical conditional and limited character. Never
share the "superstitious belief" in the "state" and never forget that
the state even in the most democratic republic, and not only in a
monarchy, is simply a machine for the suppression of one class by
another.

The bourgeoisie are compelled to be hypocritical and to describe as
"popular government", democracy in general, or pure democracy, the (
_bourgeois_ ) democratic republic which is, in practice, the
dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, the dictatorship of the exploiters over
the working people. The Scheidemanns and Kautskys, the Austerlitzes and
Renners (and now, to our regret, with the help of Friedrich Adler) fall
in line with this falsehood and hypocrisy. But Marxists, Communists,
expose this hypocrisy, and tell the workers and the working people in
general this frank and straightforward truth: the democratic republic,
the Constituent Assembly, general elections, etc., are, in practice, the
dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, and for the emancipation of labor from
the yoke of capital there is no other way but to replace this
dictatorship with _the dictatorship of the proletariat._

The dictatorship of the proletariat alone can emancipate humanity from
the oppression of capital, from the lies, falsehood and hypocrisy of
bourgeois democracy — democracy _for the rich_ — and establish democracy
_for the poor,_ that is, make the blessings of democracy _really_
accessible to the workers and poor peasants, whereas now (even in the
most democratic — _bourgeois_ — republic) the blessings of democracy
are, _in fact,_ inaccessible to the vast majority of working people.

Take, for example, freedom of assembly and freedom of the press. The
Scheidemanns and Kautskys, the Austerlitzes and Renners assure the
workers that the present elections to the Constituent Assembly in
Germany and Austria are "democratic". That is a lie. _In practice_ the
capitalists, the exploiters, the landowners and the profiteers own 9/10
of the best meeting halls, and 9/10 of the stocks of newsprint, printing
presses, etc.. The urban workers and the farm hands and day laborers
are, _in practice,_ debarred from democracy by the "sacred right of
property" (guarded by the Kautskys and Renners, and now, to our regret,
by Friedrich Adler as well) and by the bourgeois state apparatus, that
is, bourgeois officials, bourgeois judges, and so on. The present
"freedom of assembly and the press" in the "democratic" (bourgeois
democratic) German republic is false and hypocritical, because *in fact*, 
it is _freedom for the rich_ to buy and bribe the press, _freedom for
the rich_ to befuddle the people with venomous lies of the bourgeois
press, _freedom for the rich_ to keep as their "property" the
landowners' mansions, the best buildings, etc.. The dictatorship of the
proletariat _will take_ from the capitalists and hand over to the
working people the landowners' mansions, the best buildings, printing
presses and the stocks of newsprint.

But this means replacing "universal", "pure" democracy by the
"dictatorship of one class", scream the Scheidemanns and Kautskys, the
Austerlitzes and Renners (together with their followers in other
countries — the Gomperses, Hendersons, Renaudels, Vandervelde and Co.).

Wrong, we reply. This means replacing what in fact is the dictatorship
of the bourgeoisie (a dictatorship hypocritically cloaked in the forms
of the democratic bourgeois republic) by the dictatorship of the
proletariat. This means replacing democracy for the rich by democracy
for the poor. This means replacing freedom of assembly and the press for
the minority, for the exploiters, by freedom of assembly and the press
for the _majority_ of the population, for the working people. This means
a gigantic, world historic _extension_ of democracy, its transformation
from falsehood into truth, the liberation of humanity from the shackles
of capital, which _distorts_ and truncates any, even the most
"democratic" and republican, _bourgeois_ democracy. This means replacing
the bourgeois state with the _proletarian_ state, a replacement that is
the sole way the state can eventually wither away altogether.

But why not reach this goal without the dictatorship of one class? Why
not switch directly to "pure" democracy? So ask the hypocritical friends
of the bourgeoisie for the naive petty-bourgeois and philistines gulled
by them.

And we reply: Because in any capitalist society the powerful tell lies
to either the bourgeoisie or the proletariat, while the small
proprietors, inevitably, remain wavering, helpless, stupid dreamers of
"pure", i.e., nonclass or above class, democracy. Because from a society
in which one class opposes another there is no way out other than
through the dictatorship of the oppressed class. Because the proletariat
alone is capable of defeating the bourgeoisie, of overthrowing them,
being the sole class which capitalism has united and "schooled", and
which is capable of drawing to its side the wavering mass of the working
population with a petty-bourgeois way of life, of drawing them to its
side or at least "neutralizing" them. Because only mealy-mouthed
petty-bourgeois and philistines can dream — deceiving thereby both
themselves and the workers — of overthrowing capitalist oppression
without a long and difficult process of _suppressing the resistance_ of
the exploiters. In Germany and Austria this resistance is not yet very
pronounced because expropriation of the expropriators has not yet begun.
But once expropriation begins the resistance will be fierce and
desperate. In concealing this from themselves and from the workers, the
Scheidemanns and Kautskys, the Austerlitzes and Renners betray the
interests of the proletariat, switching at the most decisive moment from
the class struggle and overthrow of the yoke of the bourgeoisie to
getting the proletariat to come to terms with the bourgeoisie, achieving
"social peace" or reconciliation of exploited and exploiters.

Revolutions are the locomotives of history, said Marx. Revolutions teach
quickly. The urban workers and farm hands in Germany and Austria will
quickly discern the betrayal of the cause of socialism by the the
Scheidemanns and Kautskys, the Austerlitzes and Renners. The proletariat
will cast aside these "social traitors" — Socialists in word and
betrayers of socialism in practice — as it did in Russia with the same
kind of petty-bourgeois and philistines — the Mensheviks and "Socialist
Revolutionaries". The more complete the domination of the above minded
"leaders", the quicker the proletariat will see that only the
replacement of the bourgeois state, be it the most democratic bourgeois
republic, by a state of the type of the Paris Commune (about which so
much was said by Marx, who has been distorted and betrayed by the
Scheidemanns and Kautskys) or by a state of the Soviet type, can open
the way to socialism. The dictatorship of the proletariat will deliver
humanity from capitalist oppression and war.

Moscow, December 23, 1918

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

^([A]) The last joint preface to the Communist Manifesto written by Marx
and Engels was the Russian Edition of 1882.
