Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



DON'T HIT OUT IN ALL DIRECTIONS


_June 6, 1950_

[Part of a speech at the Third Plenary Session of the Seventh Central
Committee of the Chinese Communist Party. It throws light on the written
report "Fight for a Fundamental Turn for the Better in the Nation's
Financial and Economic Situation" and on its strategic and tactical
ideas.]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Since the Second Plenary Session of the Party's Seventh Central
Committee, nation-wide victory has been won in the new-democratic
revolution led by our Party, and the People's Republic of China has been
founded. This is a great victory, a great victory without parallel in
the history of China, a great victory of world significance following
the October Revolution. Comrade Stalin and many other foreign comrades
all consider the victory of the Chinese revolution an extremely great
one. And yet many of our comrades don't realize this because they have
become so inured to the struggle. We should widely publicize the
tremendous significance of the victory of the Chinese revolution inside
the Party and among the masses.

In the midst of this great victory we are confronted with very complex
struggles and many difficulties.

We have completed agrarian reform in the northern parts of the country
with a population of 160 million, and this must be affirmed as an
immense achievement. We won the War of Liberation by relying mainly on
these I60 million people. It was the victory of the agrarian reform that
made possible our victory in overthrowing Chiang Kai-shek. In the autumn
we shall start agrarian reform in vast areas with a population of some
310 million in order to topple the entire landlord class. In the
agrarian reform our enemies are as numerous as they are powerful Against
us are arrayed, first, the imperialists, second, the reactionaries in
Taiwan and Tibet, third, the remnant Kuomintang forces, the secret
agents and the bandits, fourth, the landlord class and, fifth, the
reactionary forces in the missionary schools established in China by the
imperialists and in religious circles and those in the cultural and
educational institutions taken over from the Kuomintang. These are our
enemies. We have to fight them one and all and accomplish the agrarian
reform in an area much larger than before. This is a very acute
struggle, unprecedented in history.

In the meantime our victory in the revolution has led to the
reorganization of our social economy. While necessary, this
reorganization puts heavy burdens on us for the time being. Many people
are dissatisfied with us because of this reorganization and because of a
certain disruption of industry and commerce wrought by the war. At
present our relations with the national bourgeoisie are very strained;
they are on tenderhooks and are very disgruntled. Unemployed
intellectuals and workers are dissatisfied with us and so are a number
of small handicraftsmen. The peasants in most rural areas are
complaining too because agrarian reform has not yet been carried out
there and besides they have to deliver grain to the state.

What is our general policy at present? It is to eliminate the remnant
Kuomintang forces, the secret agents and the bandits, overthrow the
landlord class, liberate Taiwan and Tibet and fight imperialism to the
end. In order to isolate and attack our immediate enemies, we must
convert those among the people who are dissatisfied with us into our
supporters. Although this task is fraught with difficulties at present,
we must overcome them by every possible means.

We should make proper readjustments in industry and commerce so that
factories can resume operation and the problem of unemployment can be
solved, and we should provide 2,000 million catties of grain for the
jobless workers and gain their support. When we reduce rent and
interest, suppress the bandits and local tyrants and carry out agrarian
reform, the masses of the peasantry will support us. We should also help
the small handicraftsmen find ways to earn a living. We should introduce
suitable readjustments in industry and commerce and in taxation to
improve our relations with the national bourgeoisie rather than
aggravate these relations. We should run training courses of various
kinds, military and political colleges and revolutionary institutes for
the intellectuals and educate and remould them while availing ourselves
of their services. We should have them study the history of social
development, historical materialism and other subjects. We can induce
even those who are idealists not to oppose us. Let them say that man was
created by God, we say man evolved from the ape. Some intellectuals are
advanced in age, they are over seventy, and we should provide for them
so long as they support the Party and the People's Government.

The whole Party should try earnestly and painstakingly to make a success
of its united front work. We should rally the petty bourgeoisie and the
national bourgeoisie under the leadership of the working class and on
the basis of the worker-peasant alliance. The national bourgeoisie will
eventually cease to exist, but at this stage we should rally them around
us and not push them away. We should struggle against them on the one
hand and unite with them on the other. We should make this clear to the
cadres and show by facts that it is right and necessary to unite with
the national bourgeoisie, the democratic parties, democratic personages
and intellectuals. Many of them were our enemies before, but now that
they have broken with the enemy camp and come over to our side, we
should unite with all these people, who can be more or less united with.
It is in the interest of the working people to unite with them. We need
to adopt these tactics now.

It is of vital importance to unite with the minority nationalities.
There are about thirty million of them in the whole country. Social
reforms in their areas are a matter of great importance and must be
handled cautiously. On no account must we be impetuous, for impatience
will lead to trouble. No reform is to be instituted unless the
conditions are ripe. Neither should any major reform be introduced where
only one of the conditions is ripe while the others are not. Of course,
this is not to say that no reform at all is to be carried out. As
stipulated by the Common Programme, customs and folk-ways in the
minority nationality areas may be reformed. But the minority
nationalities themselves should do the reforming. Without popular
support, without the people's armed forces and without the minority
nationalities' own cadres, no reform of a mass character should be
attempted. We must help them train their own cadres and we must unite
with the masses of the minority nationalities.

In short, we must not hit out in all directions. It is undesirable to
hit out in all directions and cause nation-wide tension. We must
definitely not make too many enemies, we must make concessions and relax
the tension a little in some quarters and concentrate our attack in one
direction. We must do our work well so that all the workers, peasants
and small handicraftsmen will support us and the overwhelming majority
of the national bourgeoisie and intellectuals will not oppose us. In
this way, the remnant Kuomintang forces, the secret agents and the
bandits will be isolated, as will the landlord class and the
reactionaries in Taiwan and Tibet, and the imperialists will find
themselves isolated before the people of our country. This is our
policy, our strategy and tactics, and it is the line of the Third
Plenary Session of the Seventh Central Committee of the Party.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

Save
