On The History of Early Christianity

I The history of early Christianity has notable points of resemblance
with the modern working-class movement. Like the latter, Christianity
was originally a movement of oppressed people: it first appeared as
the religion of slaves and emancipated slaves, of poor people deprived
of all rights, of peoples subjugated or dispersed by Rome. Both
Christianity and the workers' socialism preach forthcoming salvation
from bondage and misery; Christianity places this salvation in a life
beyond, after death, in heaven; socialism places it in this world, in
a transformation of society. Both are persecuted and baited, their
adherents are despised and made the objects of exclusive laws, the
former as enemies of the human race, the latter as enemies of the
state, enemies of religion, the family, social order. And in spite of
all persecution, nay, even spurred on by it, they forge victoriously,
irresistibly ahead. Three hundred years after its appearance
Christianity was the recognized state religion in the Roman World
Empire, and in barely sixty years socialism has won itself a position
which makes its victory absolutely certain.

If, therefore, Prof. Anton Menger wonders in his Right to the Full
Product of Labour why, with the enormous concentration of
landownership under the Roman emperors and the boundless sufferings of
the working class of the time, which was composed almost exclusively
of slaves, "socialism did not follow the overthrow of the Roman Empire
in the West," it is because he cannot see that this "socialism" did in
fact, as far as it was possible at the time, exist and even became
dominant — in Christianity.

Only this Christianity, as was bound to be the case in the historic
conditions, did not want to accomplish the social transformation in
this world, but beyond it, in heaven, in eternal life after death, in
the impending "millennium."

The parallel between the two historic phenomena forces itself upon our
attention as early as the Middle Ages in the first risings of the
oppressed peasants and particularly of the town plebeians. These
risings, like all mass movements of the Middle Ages, were bound to
wear the mask of religion and appeared as the restoration of early
Christianity from spreading degeneration. [Note by Engels: A peculiar
antithesis to this was the religious risings in the Mohammedan world,
particularly in Africa. Islam is a religion adapted to Orientals,
especially Arabs, i.e., on one hand to townsmen engaged in trade and
industry, on the other to nomadic Bedouins. Therein lies, however, the
embryo of a periodically recurring collision. The townspeople grow
rich, luxurious and lax in the observation of the "law." The Bedouins,
poor and hence of strict morals, contemplate with envy and
covetousness these riches and pleasures. Then they unite under a
prophet, a Mahdi, to chastise the apostates and restore the
observation of the ritual and the true faith and to appropriate in
recompense the treasures of the renegades. In a hundred years they are
naturally in the same position as the renegades were: a new purge of
the faith is required, a new Mahdi arises and the game starts again
from the beginning. That is what happened from the conquest campaigns
of the African Almoravids and Almohads in Spain to the last Mahdi of
Khartoum who so successfully thwarted the English. It happened in the
same way or similarly with the risings in Persia and other Mohammedan
countries. All these movements are clothed in religion but they have
their source in economic causes; and yet, even when they are
victorious, they allow the old economic conditions to persist
untouched. So the old situation remains unchanged and the collision
recurs periodically. In the popular risings of the Christian West, on
the contrary, the religious disguise is only a flag and a mask for
attacks on an economic order which is becoming antiquated. This is
finally overthrown, a new one arises and the world progresses.]

But behind the religious exaltation there was every time a very
tangible worldly interest. This appeared most splendidly in the
organization of the Bohemian Taborites under Jan Zizka, of glorious
memory; but this trait pervades the whole of the Middle Ages until it
gradually fades away after the German Peasant War to revive again with
the workingmen Communists after 1830. The French revolutionary
Communists, as also in particular Weitling and his supporters,
referred to early Christianity long before Renan's words: "If I wanted
to give you an idea of the early Christian communities I would tell
you to look at a local section of the International Working Men's
Association."

This French man of letters, who by mutilating German criticism of the
Bible in a manner unprecedented even in modern journalism composed the
novel on church history Origines du Christianisme, did not know
himself how much truth there was in the words just quoted. I should
like to see the old "International" who can read, for example, the
so-called Second Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians without old-wounds
re-opening, at least in one respect. The whole epistle, from chapter
eight onwards, echoes the eternal, and oh! so well-known complaint:
les cotisations ne rentrent pas — contributions are not coming in! How
many of the most zealous propagandists of the sixties would
sympathizingly squeeze the hand of the author of that epistle, whoever
he may be, and whisper: "So it was like that with you too!" We too —
Corinthians were legion in our Association — can sing a song about
contributions not coming in but tantalizing us as they floated
elusively before our eyes. They were the famous "millions of the
International"!

One of our best sources on the first Christians is Lucian of Samosata,
the Voltaire of classic antiquity, who was equally sceptic towards
every kind of religious superstition and therefore bad neither
pagan-religious nor political grounds to treat the Christians
otherwise than as some other kind of religious community. On the
contrary, he mocked them all for their superstition, those who prayed
to Jupiter no less than those who prayed to Christ; from his shallow
rationalistic point of view one sort of superstition was as stupid as
the other. This in any case impartial witness relates among other
things the life-story of a certain adventurous Peregrinus, Proteus by
name, from Parium in Hellespontus. When a youth, this Peregrinus made
his début in Armenia by committing fornication. He was caught in the
act and lynched according to the custom of the country. He was
fortunate enough to escape and after strangling his father in Parium
he had to flee.

"And so it happened" — I quote from Schott's translation — "that he
also came to hear of the astonishing learning of the Christians, with
whose priests and scribes he had cultivated intercourse in
Palestine. He made such progress in a short time that his teachers
were like children compared with him. He became a prophet, an elder, a
master of the synagogue, in a word, all in everything. He interpreted
their writings and himself wrote a great number of works, so that
finally people saw in him a superior being, let him lay down laws for
them and made him their overseer (bishop) .... On that ground (i.e.,
because he was a Christian) Proteus was at length arrested by the
authorities and thrown into prison.... As he thus lay in chains, the
Christians, who saw in his capture a great misfortune, made all
possible attempts to free him. But they did not succeed. Then they
administered to him in all possible ways with the greatest
solicitude. As early as daybreak one could see aged mothers, widows
and young orphans crowding at the door of his prison; the most
prominent among the Christians even bribed the warders and spent whole
nights with him; they took their meals with them and read their holy
books in his presence; briefly, the beloved Peregrinus" (he still went
by that name) "was no less to them than a new Socrates. Envoys of
Christian communities came to him even from towns in Asia Minor to
lend him a helping hand, to console him and to testify in his favour
in court. It is unbelievable how quick these people are to act
whenever it is a question of their community; they immediately spare
neither exertion nor expense. And thus from all sides money then
poured in to Peregrinus so that his imprisonment became for him a
source of great income. For the poor people persuaded themselves that
they were immortal in body and in soul and that they would live for
all eternity; that was why, they scorned death and many of them even
voluntarily written by his sacrificed their lives. Then their most
prominent lawgiver convinced them that they would all be brothers one
to another once they were converted, i.e., renounced the Greek gods,
professed faith in the crucified sophist and lived according to his
prescriptions. That is why they despise all material goods without
distinction and own them in common — doctrines which they have
accepted in good faith, without demonstration or proof. And when a
skilful imposter who knows how to make clever use of circumstances
comes to them he can manage to get rich in a short time and laugh up
his sleeve over these simpletons. For the rest, Peregrinus was set
free by him who was then prefect of Syria."

Then, after a few more adventures,

"Our worthy set forth a second time" (from Parium) "on his
peregrinations, the Christians' good disposition standing him in lieu
of money for his journey: they administered to his needs everywhere
and never let him suffer want. He was fed for a time in this way. But
then, when he violated the laws of the Christians too — I think he was
caught eating of some forbidden food — they excommunicated him from
their community."

What memories of youth come to my mind as I read this passage from
Lucian! First of all the "prophet Albrecht" who from about 1840
literally plundered the Weitling communist communities in Switzerland
for several years — a tall powerful man with a long beard who wandered
on foot through Switzerland and gathered audiences for his mysterious
new Gospel of world emancipation, but who, after all, seems to have
been a tolerably harmless hoaxer and soon died. Then his not so
harmless successor, "the doctor" Georg Kuhlmann from Holstein, who put
to profit the time when Weitling was in prison to convert the
communities of French Switzerland to his own Gospel, and for a time
with such success that he even caught August Becker, by far the
cleverest but also the biggest ne'er-do-well among them. This Kuhlmann
used to deliver lectures to them which were published in Geneva in
1845 under the title The New World, or the Kingdom of the Spirit on
Earth. Proclamation. In the introduction, supporters (probably August
Becker) we read:

"What was needed was a man on whose lips all our sufferings and all
our longings and hopes, in a word, all that affects our time most
profoundly should find expression .... This man, whom our time was
waiting for, has come. He is the doctor Georg Kuhlmann from Holstein
He has come forward with the doctrine of the new world or the kingdom
of the spirit in reality."

I hardly need to add that this doctrine of the new world is nothing
more than the most vulgar sentimental nonsense rendered in
half-biblical expressions a la Lamennais and declaimed with
prophet-like arrogance. But this did not prevent the good Weitlingers
from carrying the swindler shoulder-high as the Asian Christians once
did Peregrinus. They who were otherwise arch-democrats and extreme
equalitarians to the extent of fostering ineradicable suspicion
against any schoolmaster, journalist, and any man generally who was
not a manual worker as being an "erudite" who was out to exploit them,
let themselves be persuaded by the melodramatically arrayed Kuhlman
that in the "New World" it would be the wisest of all, id est,
Kuhlmann, who would regulate the distribution of pleasures and that
therefore, even then, in the Old World, the disciples ought to bring
pleasures by the bushel to that same wisest of all while they
themselves should be content with crumbs. So Peregrinus Kuhlmann lived
a splendid life of pleasure at the expense of the community — as long
as it lasted. It did not last very long, of course; the growing
murmurs of doubters and unbelievers and the menace of persecution by
the Vaudois Government put an end to the "Kingdom of the Spirit" in
Lausanne — Kuhlmann disappeared.

Everybody who has known by experience the European working-class
movement in its beginnings will remember dozens of similar
examples. Today such extreme cases, at least in the large centres,
have become impossible; but in remote districts where the movement has
won new ground a small Peregrinus of this kind can still count on a
temporary limited success. And just as all those who have nothing to
look forward to from the official world or have come to the end of
their tether with it — opponents of inoculation, supporters of
abstemiousness, vegetarians, anti-vivisectionists, nature-healers,
free-community preachers whose communities have fallen to pieces,
authors of new theories on the origin of the universe, unsuccessful or
unfortunate inventors, victims of real or imaginary injustice who are
termed "good-for-nothing pettifoggers" by all bureaucracy, honest
fools and dishonest swindlers — all throng to the working-class
parties in all countries — so it was with the first Christians. All
the elements which had been set free, i.e., at a loose end, by the
dissolution of the old world came one after the other into the orbit
Christianity as the only element that resisted that process of
dissolution — for the very reason that it was the necessary product of
that process — and that therefore persisted and grew while the other
elements were but ephemeral flies. There was no fanaticism, no
foolishness, no scheming that did not flock to the young Christian
communities and did not at least for a time and in isolated places
find attentive ears and willing believers. And like our first
communist workers' associations the early Christians too took with
such unprecedented gullibility to anything which suited their purpose
that we are not even sure that some fragment or other of the "great
number of works" that Peregrinus wrote for Christianity did not find
its way into our New Testament.

II German criticism of the Bible, so far the only scientific basis of
our knowledge of the history of early Christianity, followed a double
tendency.

The first tendency was that of the Tübingen school, in which, in the
broad sense, D. F. Strauss must also be included. In critical inquiry
it goes as far as a theological school can go. It admits that the four
Gospels are not eyewitness accounts but only later adaptations of
writings that have been lost; that no more than four of the Epistles
attributed to the apostle Paul are authentic, etc. It strikes out of
the historical narrations all miracles and contradictions, considering
them as unacceptable; but from the rest it tries "to save what can be
saved" and then its nature, that of a theological school, is very
evident. Thus it enabled Renan, who bases himself mostly on it, to
"save" still more by applying the same method and, moreover, to try to
impose upon us as historically authenticated many New Testament
accounts that are more than doubtful and, besides, a multitude of
other legends about martyrs. In any case, all that the Tübingen school
rejects as unhistorical or apocryphal can be considered as finally
eliminated for science.

The other tendency has but one representative — Bruno Bauer. His
greatest service consists not merely in having given a pitiless
criticism of the Gospels and the Epistles of the apostles, but in
having for the first time seriously undertaken an inquiry into not
only the Jewish and Greco-Alexandrian elements but the purely Greek
and Greco-Roman elements that first opened for Christianity the career
of a universal religion. The legend that Christianity arose ready and
complete out of Judaism and, starting from Palestine, conquered the
world with its dogma already defined in the main and its morals, has
been untenable since Bruno Bauer; it can continue to vegetate only in
the theological faculties and with people who wish "to keep religion
alive for the people" even at the expense of science. The enormous
influence which the Philonic school of Alexandria and Greco-Roman
vulgar philosophy — Platonic and mainly Stoic — had on Christianity,
which became the state religion under Constantine, is far from having
been defined in detail, but its existence has been proved and that is
primarily the achievement of Bruno Bauer: he laid the foundation of
the proof that Christianity was not imported from outside — from Judea
— into the Romano-Greek world and imposed on it, but that, at least in
its world-religion form, it is that world's own product. Bauer, of
course, like all those who are fighting against deep-rooted
prejudices, overreached his aim in this work. In order to define
through literary sources, too, Philo's and particularly Seneca's
influence on emerging Christianity and to show up the authors of the
New Testament formally as downright plagiarists of those philosophers
he had to place the appearance of the new religion about half a
century later, to reject the opposing accounts of Roman historians and
take extensive liberties with historiography in general. According to
him Christianity as such appears only under the Flavians, the
literature of the New Testament only under Hadrian, Antoninus and
Marcus Aurelius. As a result the New Testament accounts of Jesus and
his disciples are deprived for Bauer of any historical background:
they are diluted in legends in which the phases of interior
development and the moral struggles of the ' first communities are
transferred to more or less fictitious persons. Not Galilee and
Jerusalem, but Alexandria and Rome, according to Bauer, are the
birthplaces of the new religion.

If, therefore, the Tübingen school presents to us in the remains of
the New Testament stories and literature that it left untouched the
extreme maximum of what science today can still accept as disputable,
Bruno Bauer presents to us maximum of what can be contested. The
factual truth lies between these two limits. Whether that truth can be
defined with the means at our disposal today is very doubtful. New
discoveries, particularly in Rome, in the Orient, and above all in
Egypt, will contribute more to this than any criticism.

But we have in the New Testament a single book the time of the writing
of which can be defined within a few months, which must have been
written between June 67 and January or April 68; a book, consequently,
which belongs to the very beginning of the Christian era and reflects
with the most naive fidelity and in the corresponding idiomatic
language the ideas of the beginning of that era. This book, therefore,
in my opinion, is a far more important source from which to define
what early Christianity really was than all the rest of the New
Testament, which, in its present form, is of a far later date. This
book is the so-called Revelation of John. And as this, apparently the
most obscure book in the whole Bible, is moreover today, thanks to
German criticism, the most comprehensible and the clearest, I shall
give my readers an account of it.

One needs but to look into this book in order to be convinced of the
state of great exaltation not only of the author, but also of the
"surrounding medium" in which he moved. Our "Revelation" is not the
only one of its kind and time. From the year 164 before our era, when
the first which has reached us, the so-called Book of Daniel, was
written, up to about 250 of our era, the approximate date of
Commodian's Carmen, Renan counted no fewer than fifteen extant
classical "Apocalypses," not counting subsequent imitations. (I quote
Renan because his book is also the best known by non-specialists and
the most accessible.) That was a time when even in Rome and Greece and
still more in Asia Minor, Syria and Egypt an absolutely uncritical
mixture of the crassest superstitions of the most varying peoples was
indiscriminately accepted and complemented by pious deception and
downright charlatanism; a time in which miracles, ecstasies, visions,
apparitions, divining, gold-making, cabbala and other secret magic
played a primary role. It was in that atmosphere, and, moreover, among
a class of people who were more inclined than any other to listen to
these supernatural fantasies, that Christianity arose. For did not the
Christian gnostics in Egypt during the second century of our era
engage extensively in alchemy and introduce alchemistic notions into
their teachings, as the Leyden papyrus documents, among others,
prove. And the Chaldean and Judean mathematici, who, according to
Tacitus, were twice expelled from Rome for magic, once under Claudius
and again under Vitellius, practised no other kind of geometry than
the kind we shall find at the basis of John's Revelation.

To this we must add another thing. All the apocalypses attribute to
themselves the right to deceive their readers. Not only were they
written as a rule by quite different people than their alleged
authors, and mostly by people who lived much later, for example the
Book of Daniel, the Book of Henoch, the Apocalypses of Ezra, Baruch,
Juda, etc., and the Sibylline books, but, as far as their main content
is concerned, they prophesy only things that had already happened long
before and were quite well known to the real author. Thus in the year
164, shortly before the death of Antiochus Epiphanes, the author of
the Book of Daniel makes Daniel, who is supposed to have lived in the
time of Nebuchadnezzar, prophesy the rise and fall of the Persian and
Macedonian empires and the beginning of the Roman Empire, in order by
this proof of his gift of prophecy to prepare the reader to accept the
final prophecy that the people of Israel will overcome all hardships
and finally be victorious. If therefore John's Revelation were really
the work of its alleged author it would be the only exception among
all apocalyptic literature.

The John who claims to be the author was, in any case, a man of great
distinction among the Christians of Asia Minor. This is borne out by
the tone of the message to the seven churches. Possibly he was the
apostle John, whose historical existence, however, is not completely
authenticated but is very probable. If this apostle was really the
author, so much the better for our point of view. That would be the
best confirmation that the Christianity of this book is real genuine
early Christianity. Let it be noted in passing that, apparently, the
Revelation was not written by the same author as the Gospel or the
three Epistles which are also attributed to John.

The Revelation consists of a series of visions. In the first Christ
appears in the garb of a high priest, goes in the midst of seven
candlesticks representing the seven churches of Asia and dictates to
"John" messages to the seven "angels" of those churches. Here at the
very beginning we see plainly the difference between this Christianity
and Constantine's universal religion formulated by the Council of
Nicaea. The Trinity is not only unknown, it is even
impossible. Instead of the one Holy Ghost of later we here have the
"seven spirits of God" construed by the Rabbis from Isaiah XI,
2. Christ is the son of God, the first and the last, the alpha and the
omega, by no means God himself or equal to God, but on the contrary,
"the beginning of the creation of God," hence an emanation of God,
existing from all eternity but subordinate to God, like the
above-mentioned seven spirits. In Chapter XV, 3 the martyrs in heaven
sing "the song of Moses, the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb"
glorifying God. Hence Christ here appears not only as subordinate to
God but even, in a certain respect, on an equal footing with
Moses. Christ is crucified in Jerusalem (XI, 8) but rises again (I, 5,
18); he is "the Lamb" that has been sacrificed for the sins of the
world and with whose blood the faithful of all tongues and nations
have been redeemed to God. Here we find the basic idea which enabled
early Christianity to develop into a universal religion. All Semitic
and European religions of that time shared the view that the gods
offended by the actions of man could be propitiated by sacrifice; the
first revolutionary basic idea (borrowed from the Philonic school) in
Christianity was that by the one great voluntary sacrifice of a
mediator the sins of all times and all men were atoned for once for
all — in respect of the faithful. Thus the necessity of any further
sacrifices was removed and with it the basis for a multitude of
religious rites: but freedom from rites that made difficult or forbade
intercourse with people of other confessions was the first condition
of a universal religion. In spite of this the habit of sacrifice was
so deeply rooted in the customs of peoples that Catholicism — which
borrowed so much from paganism — found it appropriate to accommodate
itself to this fact by the introduction of at least the symbolical
sacrifice of the mass. On the other hand there is no trace whatever of
the dogma of original sin in our book.

But the most characteristic in these messages, as in the whole book,
is that it never and nowhere occurs to the author to refer to himself
and his co-believers by any other name than that of Jews. He
reproaches the members of the sects in Smyrna and Philadelphia against
whom he fulminates with the fact that they "say they are Jews, and are
not, but are the synagogue of Satan"; of those in Pergamos he says:
they hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a
stumbling-block before the children of Israel, to eat things
sacrificed unto idols, and to commit fornication. Here it is therefore
not a case of conscious Christians but of people who say they are
Jews. Granted, their Judaism is a new stage of development of the
earlier but for that very reason it is the only true one. Hence, when
the saints appeared before the throne of God there came first 144,000
Jews, 12,000 from each tribe, and only after them the countless masses
of heathens converted to this renovated Judaism. That was how little
our author was aware in the year 69 of the Christian era that he
represented quite a new phase in the development of a religion which
was to become one of the most revolutionary elements in the history of
the human mind.

We therefore see that the Christianity of that time, which was still
unaware of itself, was as different as heaven from earth from the
later dogmatically fixed universal religion of the Nicene Council; one
cannot be recognized in the other. Here we have neither the dogma nor
the morals of later Christianity but instead a feeling that one is
struggling against the whole world and that the struggle will be a
victorious one; an eagerness for the struggle and a certainty of
victory which are totally lacking in Christians of today and which are
to be found in our time only at the other pole of society, among the
Socialists.

In fact, the struggle against a world that at the beginning was
superior in force, and at the same time against the novators
themselves, is common to the early Christians and the
Socialists. Neither of these two great movements were made by leaders
or prophets — although there are prophets enough among both of them —
they are mass movements. And mass movements are bound to be confused
at the beginning; confused because the thinking of the masses at first
moves among contradictions, lack of clarity and lack of cohesion, and
also because of the role that prophets still play in them at the
beginning. This confusion is to be seen in the formation of numerous
sects which right against one another with at least the same zeal as
against the common external enemy. So it was with early Christianity,
so it was in the beginning of the socialist movement, no matter how
much that worried the well-meaning worthies who preached unity where
no unity was possible.

Was the International held together by a uniform dogma? On the
contrary. There were Communists of the French pre-1848 tradition,
among whom again were various shades: Communists of Weitling's school
and others of the regenerated Communist League, Proudhonists
dominating in France and Belgium, Blanquists, the German Workers'
Party, and finally the Bakuninist anarchists, who for a while had the
upper hand in Spain and Italy, to mention only the principal
groups. It took a whole quarter of a century from the foundation of
the International before the separation from the anarchists was final
and complete everywhere and unity could be established at least in
respect of most general economic viewpoints. And that with our means
of communication — railways, telegraph, giant industrial cities, the
press, organized people's assemblies.

There was among the early Christians the same division into countless
sects, which was the very means by which discussion and thereby later
unity was achieved. We already find it in this book, which is beyond
doubt the oldest Christian document, and our author fights it with the
same irreconcilable ardour as the great sinful world outside. There
were first of all the Nicolaitans, in Ephesus and Pergamos; those that
said they were Jews but were the synagogue of Satan, in Smyrna and
Philadelphia; the supporters of Balaam, who is called a false prophet,
in Pergamos; those who said they were apostles and were not, in
Ephesus; and finally, in Thyatira, the supporters of the false
prophetess who is described as a Jezebel. We are given no more details
about these sects, it being only said about the followers of Balaam
and Jezebel that they ate things sacrificed to idols and committed
fornication. Attempts have been made to conceive these five sects as
Pauline Christians and all the messages as directed against Paul, the
false apostle, the alleged Balaam and "Nicolaos." Arguments to this
effect, hardly tenable, are to be found collected in Renan's Saint
Paul (Paris 1869, pp. 303-05 and 367-70). They all tend to explain the
messages by the Acts of the Apostles and the so-called Epistles of
Paul, writings which, at least in their present form, are no less than
60 years younger than the Revelation and the relevant factual data of
which, therefore, are not only extremely doubtful but also totally
contradictory. But the decisive thing is that it could not occur to
the author to give five different names to one and the same sect and
even two for Ephesus alone (false apostles and Nicolaitans) and two
also for Pergamos (Balaamites and Nicolaitans), and to refer to them
every time expressly as two different sects. At the same time one
cannot deny the probability that there were also elements among these
sects that would be termed Pauline today.

In both cases in which more details are given the accusation bears on
eating meats offered to idols and on fornication, two points on which
the Jews — the old ones as well as the Christian ones — were in
continual dispute with converted heathens. The meat from heathen
sacrifices was not only served at festal meals where refusal of the
food offered would have seemed improper and could even have been
dangerous; it was also sold on the public markets, where it was not
always possible to ascertain whether it was pure in the eyes of the
law. By fornication the Jews understood not only extra-nuptial sexual
relations but also marriage within the degrees of relationship
prohibited by the Jewish law or between a Jew and a gentile, and it is
in this sense that the word is generally understood in the Acts of the
Apostles XV, 20 and 29. But our John has his own views on the sexual
relations allowed to orthodox Jews. He says, XIV, 4, of the 144,000
heavenly Jews: "These are they which were not defiled with women; for
they are virgins." And in fact, in our John's heaven there is not a
single woman. He therefore belongs to the trend, which also often
appears in other early Christian writings, that considers sexual
relations generally as sinful. And when we moreover take into
consideration the fact that he calls Rome the Great Whore with whom
the kings of the earth have committed fornication and have become
drunk with the wine of fornication and the merchants of the earth have
waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies, it becomes
impossible for us to take the word in the messages in the narrow sense
that theological apologists would like to attribute to it in order
thus to catch at some confirmation of other passages in the New
Testament. On the contrary. These passages in the messages are an
obvious indication of a phenomenon common to all times of great
agitation, that the traditional bonds of sexual relations, like all
other fetters, are shaken off. In the first centuries of Christianity,
too, there appeared often enough, side by side with ascetics which
mortified the, flesh, the tendency to extend Christian freedom to a
more or less unrestrained intercourse between man and woman. The same
thing was observed in the modern socialist movement. What unspeakable
horror was felt in the then Copious nursery" of Germany at
Saint-Simon's a réhabilitation de la chair in the thirties, which was
rendered in German as "Wiedereinsetzung des Fleisches" (reinstatement
of the flesh)! And the most horrified of all were the then ruling
distinguished estates (there were as yet no classes in our country)
who could not live in Berlin any more than on their country estates
without repeated reinstatement of their flesh! If only those good
people had been able to know Fourier, who contemplated quite different
pranks for the' flesh! With the overcoming of utopianism these
extravagances yielded to a more rational and in reality far more
radical conception, and since Germany has grown out of Heine's pious
nursery and developed into the centre of the Socialist movement the
hypocritical indignation of the distinguished pious world is laughed
at.

That is all the dogmatic content of the messages. The rest consists in
exhorting the faithful to be zealous in propaganda, to courageous and
proud confession of their faith in face of the foe, to unrelenting
struggle against the enemy both within and without — and as far as
this goes they could just as well have been written by one of the
prophetically minded enthusiasts of the International.

III The messages are but the introduction to the theme properly
so-called of John's communication to the seven churches of Asia Minor
and through them to the remaining reformed Judaism of the year 69, out
of which Christianity later developed. And herewith we enter the
innermost holy of holies of early Christianity.

What kind of people were the first Christians recruited from? Mainly
from the "labouring and burdened," the members of the lowest strata of
the people, as becomes a revolutionary element. And what did they
consist of? In the towns of impoverished free men, all sorts of
people, like the "mean whites" of the southern slave states and the
European beachcombers and adventurers in colonial and Chinese
seaports, then of emancipated slaves and, above all, actual slaves; on
the large estates in Italy, Sicily, and Africa of slaves, and in the
rural districts of the provinces of small peasants who had fallen more
and more into bondage through debt. There was absolutely no common
road to emancipation for all these elements. For all of them paradise
lay lost behind them; for the ruined free men it was the former polis,
the town and the state at the same time, of which their forefathers
had been free citizens; for the war-captive slaves the time of freedom
before their subjugation and captivity; for the small peasants the
abolished gentile social system and communal landownership. All that
had been smitten down by the levelling iron fist, of conquering
Rome. The largest social group that antiquity had attained was the
tribe and the union of kindred tribes; among the barbarians grouping
was based on alliances of families and among the townfounding Greeks
and Italians of the polis, which consisted of one or more kindred
tribes. Philip and Alexander gave the Hellenic peninsula political
unity but that did not lead to the formation of a Greek
nation. Nations became possible only through the downfall of Roman
world domination. This domination had put an end once for all to the
smaller unions; military might, Roman jurisdiction and the
tax-collecting machinery completely dissolved the traditional inner
organization. To the loss of independence and distinctive organization
was added the forcible plunder by military and civil authorities who
took the treasures of the subjugated away from them and then lent them
back at usurious rates in order to extort still more out of them. The
pressure of taxation and the need for money which it caused in regions
dominated only or mainly by natural economy plunged the peasants into
ever deeper bondage to the usurers, gave rise to great differences in
fortune, making the rich richer and the poor completely destitute. Any
resistance of isolated small tribes or towns to the gigantic Roman
world power was hopeless. Where was the way out, salvation, for the
enslaved, oppressed and impoverished, a way out common to all these
groups of people whose interests were mutually alien or even opposed?
And yet it had to be found if a great revolutionary movement was to
embrace them all.

This way out was found. But not in this world. In the state in which
things were it could only be a religious way out. Then a new world was
disclosed. The continued life of the soul after the death of the body
had gradually become a recognized article of faith throughout the
Roman world. A kind of recompense or punishment of the deceased souls
for their actions while on earth also received more and more general
recognition. As far as recompense was concerned, admittedly. the
prospects were not so good: antiquity was too spontaneously
materialistic not to attribute infinitely greater value to life on
earth than to life in the kingdom of shadows; to live on after death
was considered by the Greeks rather as a misfortune. Then came
Christianity, which took recompense and punishment in the world beyond
seriously and created heaven and hell, and a way out was found which
would lead the labouring and burdened from this vale of woe to eternal
paradise. And in fact only with the prospect of a reward in the world
beyond could the stoico-philonic renunciation of the world and
ascetics be exalted to the basic moral principle of a new universal
religion which would inspire the oppressed masses with enthusiasm.

But this heavenly paradise does not open to the faithful by the mere
fact of their death. We shall see that the kingdom of God, the capital
of which is the New Jerusalem, can only be conquered and opened after
arduous struggles with the powers of hell. But in the imagination of
the early Christians these struggles were immediately ahead. John
describes his book at the very beginning as the revelation of "things
which must shortly come to pass ; an immediately afterwards, I, 3, he
declares "Blessed is he that readeth and they that hear the words of
this prophecy ... for the time is at hand." To the church in
Philadelphia Christ sends the message: "Behold, I come quickly." And
in the last chapter the angel says he has shown John "things which
must shortly be done" and gives him the order: "Seal not the sayings
of the prophecy of this book: for the time is at hand." And Christ
himself says twice (XXII, 12, 20) "I come quickly." The sequel will
show us how soon this coming was expected.

The visions of the Apocalypse, which the author now shows us, are
copied throughout, and mostly literally, from earlier models, partly
from the classical prophets of the Old Testament, particularly
Ezekiel, partly from later Jewish apocalypses written after the
fashion of the Book of Daniel and in particular from the Book of
Henoch which had already been written at least in part. Criticism has
shown to the smallest details where our John got every picture, every
menacing sign, every plague sent to unbelieving humanity, in a word,
the whole of the material for his book; so that he not only shows
great poverty of mind but even himself proves that he never
experienced, even in imagination the alleged ecstasies and visions
which he describes.

The order of these visions is briefly as follows: First John sees God
sitting on his throne holding in his hand a book with seven seals and
before him the Lamb that has been slain and has risen from the dead
(Christ) and is found worthy to open the seals of the book. The
opening of the seals is followed by all sorts of miraculous menacing
signs. When the fifth seal is opened John sees under the altar of God
the souls of the martyrs of Christ that were slain for the word of God
and who cry with a loud voice saving: "How long, 0 Lord, dost Thou not
judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?" And then
white robes are given to them and they are told that they must rest
for a little while yet, for more martyrs must be slain.

So here it is not yet a question of a "religion of love," of "Love
your enemies, bless them that curse you," etc. Here undiluted revenge
is preached, sound, honest revenge on the persecutors of the
Christians. So it is in the whole of the book. The nearer the crisis
comes, the heavier the plagues and punishments rain from the heavens
and with all the more satisfaction John announces that the mass of
humanity will not atone for their sins, that new scourges of God must
lash them, that Christ must rule them with a rod of iron and tread the
wine-press of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God, but that the
impious still remain obdurate in their hearts. It is the natural
feeling, free of all hypocrisy, that a fight is going on and that — ?
la guerre comme ? la guerre.

When the seventh seal is opened there come seven angels with seven
trumpets and each time one of them sounds his trumpet new horrors
occur. After the seventh blast seven more angels come on to the scene
with the seven vials of the wrath of God which they pour out upon the
earth; still more plagues and punishments, mainly boring repetitions
of what has already happened several times. Then comes the woman,
Babylon the Great Whore, sitting arrayed in scarlet over the waters,
drunk with the blood of the saints and the martyrs of Jesus, the great
city of the seven hills that rules over all the kings of the
earth. She is sitting on a beast with seven heads and ten horns. The
seven heads represent the seven hills, and also seven "kings." Of
those kings five are fallen, one is, and the other is not yet come,
and after him comes again one of the first five; he was wounded to
death but was healed. He will reign over the world for 42 months or
3/2 years (half of a week of seven years) and will persecute the
faithful to death and bring the rule of godlessness. But then follows
the great final fight, the saints and the martyrs are avenged by the
destruction of the Great Whore Babylon and all her followers, i.e.,
the main mass of mankind; the devil is cast into the bottomless pit
and shut up there for a thousand years during which Christ reigns with
the martyrs risen from the dead. But after a thousand years the devil
is freed again and there is another great battle of the spirits in
which he is finally defeated. Then follows the second resurrection,
when the other dead also arise and appear before the throne of
judgment of God (not of Christ, be it noted) and the faithful will
enter a new heaven, a new earth, and a new Jerusalem for life eternal.

As this whole monument is made up of exclusively pre-Christian Jewish
material it presents almost exclusively Jewish ideas. Since things
started to go badly in this world for the people of Israel, from the
time of the tribute to the Assyrians and Babylonians, from the
destruction of the two kingdoms of Israel and Juda to the bondage
under Seleucis, that is from Isaiah to Daniel, in every dark period
there were prophecies of a saviour. In Daniel, XII, 1-3, there is even
a prophecy about Michael, the guardian angel of the Jews, coming down
on earth to save them from great trouble; many dead will come to life
again, there will be a kind of last judgment and the teachers who have
taught the people justice will shine like stars for all eternity. The
only Christian point is the great stress laid on the imminent reign of
Christ and the glory of the faithful, particularly the martyrs who
have risen from the dead.

For the interpretation of these prophecies, as far as they refer to
events of that time, we are indebted to German criticism, particularly
Ewald, Lücke and Ferdinand Benary. It has been made accessible to
non-theologians by Renan. We have already seen that Babylon, the Great
Whore, stands for Rome, the city of seven hills. We are told in
Chapter XVII, 9-11, about the beast on which she sits that:

"The seven heads" of the beast "are seven mountains, on which the
woman sitteth. And there are seven kings: five are fallen, and one is,
and the other is not yet come; and when he cometh he must continue a
short space. And the beast that was, and is not, even. he is the
eighth, and is of the seven, and goeth into perdition."

According to this the beast is Roman world domination, represented by
seven caesars in succession, one of them having been mortally wounded
and no longer reigning, but he will be healed and will return. It will
be given unto him as the eighth to establish the kingdom of blasphemy
and defiance of God. It will be given unto him

"to make war with the saints and to overcome them.... And all that
dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in
the book of life of the Lamb.... And he causeth all, both small and
great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in their right
hand, or in their foreheads: and that no man might buy or sell, save
he that had the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his
name. Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count the number
of the beast, for it is the number of a man; and his number is Six
hundred threescore and six." (XII, 7-18.)

We merely note that boycott is mentioned here as one of the measures
to be applied against the Christians by the Roman Empire — and is
therefore patently an invention of the devil — and pass on to the
question who this Roman emperor is who has reigned once before, was
wounded to death and removed but will return as the eighth in the
series in the role of Antichrist.

Taking Augustus as the first we have: 2. Tiberius, 3. Caligula,
4. Claudius, 5. Nero, 6. Galba. "Five are fallen, and one is." Hence,
Nero is already fallen and Galba is. Galba ruled from June 9, 68 to
January 15, 69. But immediately after he ascended the throne the
legions of the Rhine revolted under Vitellius while other generals
prepared military risings in other provinces. In Rome itself the
praetorians rose, killed Galba and proclaimed Otho emperor.

From this we see that our Revelation was written under Galba. Probably
towards the end of his rule. Or, at the latest, during the three
months (up to April 15, 69) of the rule of Otho, "the seventh." But
who is the eighth, who was and is not? That we learn from the number
666.

Among the Semites — Chaldeans and Jews — there was at the time a kind
of magic based on the double meaning of letters. As about 300 years
before our era Hebrew letters were also used as symbols for numbers:
a=l, b=2, g=3, d=4, etc. The cabbala diviners added up the value of
each letter of a name and sought from the sum to prophesy the future
of the one who bore the name, e.g., by forming words or combinations
of words of equal value. Secret words and the like were also expressed
in this language of numbers. This art was given the Greek name
gematriah, geometry; the Chaldeans, who pursued this as a business and
were called mathematici by Tacitus, were later expelled from Rome
under Claudius and again under Vitellius, presumably for "serious
disorders."

It was by means of this mathematics that our number 666 appeared. It
is a disguise for the name of one of the first five caesars. But
besides the number 666, Irenaeus, at the end of the second century,
knew another reading — 616, which, at all events, appeared at a time
when the number puzzle was still widely known. The proof of the
solution will be if it holds good for both numbers.

This solution was given by Ferdinand Benary of Berlin. The name is
Nero. The number is based on xxx xxxx Neron Kesar, the Hebrew spelling
of the Greek Nerôn Kaisar, Emperor Nero, authenticated by means of the
Talmud and Palmyrian inscriptions. This inscription was found on coins
of Nero's time minted in the eastern half of the empire. And so — n
(nun)=50; r (resh)=200; v (vau) for o=6; n (nun)=50; k (kaph)=100; s
(samech)=60; r (resh)=200. Total 666. If we take as a basis the Latin
spelling Nero Caesar the second nun=50 disappears and we get 666 - 50
= 616, which is Irenaeus's reading.

In fact the whole Roman Empire suddenly broke into confusion in
Galba's time. Galba himself marched on Rome at the head of the Spanish
and Gallic legions to overthrow Nero, who fled and ordered an
emancipated slave to kill him. But not only the praetorians in Rome
plotted against Galba, the supreme commanders in the provinces did
too; new pretendants to the throne appeared everywhere and prepared to
march on Rome with their legions. The empire seemed doomed to civil
war, its dissolution appeared imminent. Over and above all this the
rumour spread, especially in the East, that Nero had not been killed
but only wounded, that he had fled to the Parthians and was about to
advance with an army over the Euphrates to begin another and more
bloody rule of terror. Achaia and Asia in particular were terrified by
such reports. And at the very time at which the Revelation must have
been written there appeared a false Nero who settled with a fairly
considerable number of supporters not far from Patmos and Asia Minor
on the island of Kytnos in the Aegean Sea (now called Thermia), until
he was killed while Otho still reigned. What was there to be
astonished at in the fact that among the Christians, against whom Nero
had begun the first great persecution, the view spread that he would
return as the Antichrist and that his return and the intensified
attempt at a bloody suppression of the new sect that it would involve
would be the sign and prelude of the return of Christ, of the great
victorious struggle against the powers of hell, of the thousand year
kingdom "shortly" to be established, the confident expectation of
which inspired the martyrs to go joyfully to death?v

Christian and Christian-influenced literature in the first two
centuries gives sufficient indication that the secret of the number
666 was then known to many. Irenaeus no longer knew it, but on the
other hand he and many others up to the end of the third century also
knew that the returning Nero was meant by the beast of the
Apocalypse. This trace is then lost and the work which interests us is
fantastically interpreted by religious-minded future-tellers; I myself
as a child knew old people who, following the example of old Johann
Albrecht Bengel, expected the end of the world and the last judgment
in the year 1836. The prophecy was fulfilled, and to the very
year. The victim of the last judgment, however, was not the sinful
world, but the pious interpreters of the Revelation themselves. For in
1836 F. Benary provided the key to the number 666 and thus put a
torturous end to all the prophetical calculations, that new gematriah.

Our John can only give a superficial description of the kingdom of
heaven that is reserved for the, faithful. The new Jerusalem is laid
out on a fairly large scale, at least according to the conceptions of
the time; it is 12,000 furlongs or, 2,227 square kilometres, so that
its area is about five million square kilometres, more than half the
size of the United States of America. And it is built of gold and all
manner of precious stones. There God lives with his people, lightening
them instead of the sun, and there shall be no more death, neither
sorrow, neither shall there be any more pain. And a pure river of
water of life flows through the city, and on either side of the river
are trees of life, bearing twelve manner of fruits and yielding fruit
every month; and the leaves of the tree "serve for the hearing of the
nations." (A kind of medicinal beverage, Renan thinks — L'Antechrist,
p. 542.) Here the saints shall live for ever.

Such, as far as we know, was Christianity in Asia Minor, its main
seat, about the year 68. No trace of any Trinity but, on the contrary,
the old one and indivisible Jehovah of later Judaism which had exalted
him from the national god of the Jews to the one and supreme God of
heaven and earth, where he claims to rule over all nations, promising
mercy to those who are converted and mercilessly smiting down the
obdurate in accordance with the ancient parcere subjectis uc debellare
superbos. "Pardon the humble and make war on the proud."] Hence, this
God, in person, not Christ as in the later accounts of the Gospels and
the Epistles, will judge at the last judgment. According to the
Persian doctrine of emanation which was current in later Judaism,
Christ the Lamb proceeds eternally from him as do also, but on a lower
footing, the "seven spirits of God" who owe their existence to a
misunderstanding of a poetical passage (Isaiah, XI, 2). All of them
are subordinate to God, not God themselves or equal to him. The Lamb
sacrifices itself to atone for the sins of the world and for that it
is considerably promoted in heathen, for its voluntary death is
credited as an extraordinary feat throughout the book, not as
something which proceeds necessarily from its intrinsic
nature. Naturally the whole heavenly court of elders, cherubim, angels
and saints is there. In order to become a religion monotheism has ever
had to make concessions to polytheism — since the time of the
Zend-Avesta. With the Jews the decline to the sensuous gods of the
heathens continued chronically until, after the exile, the heavenly
court according to the Persian model adapted religion somewhat better
to the people's fantasy, and Christianity itself, even after it had
replaced the eternally self-equal immutable god of the Jews by the
mysterious self-differentiating god of the Trinity, could find nothing
to supplant the worship of the old gods but that of the saints; thus,
according to Fallmerayer, the worship of Jupiter in Peloponnesus,
Maina and Arcadia died out only about the ninth century. (Geschichte
der Halbinsel Morea, I, p. 227.) Only the modern bourgeois period and
its Protestantism did away with the saints again and at last took
differentiated monotheism seriously.

In the book there is just as little mention of original sin and
justification by faith. The faith of these early militant communities
is quite different from that of the later victorious church: side by
side with the sacrifice of the Lamb, the imminent return of Christ and
the thousand-year kingdom which is shortly to dawn form its essential
content; this faith survives only through active propaganda,
unrelenting struggle against the internal and external enemy, the
proud profession of the revolutionary standpoint before the heathen
judges and martyrdom, confident in victory.

We have seen that the author is not yet aware that he is something
else than a Jew. Accordingly there is no mention of baptism in the
whole book, just as many more facts indicate that baptism was
instituted in the second period of Christianity. The 144,000 believing
Jews are "sealed," not baptized. It is said of the saints in heaven
and the faithful upon earth that they had washed themselves of their
sins and washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the
Lamb; there is no mention of the water of baptism.. The two prophets
who precede the coming of the Antichrist in Chapter XI do not baptize;
and according to XIX, 10, the testimony of Jesus is not baptism but
the spirit of prophecy. Baptism should naturally have been mentioned
in all these cases if it had already been in vigour; we may therefore
conclude with almost absolute certainty that the author did not know
of it, that it first appeared when the Christians finally separated
from the Jews.

Neither does our author know any more about the second sacrament, the
Eucharist. If in the Lutheran text Christ promises all the Thyatirans
that remain firm in the faith to come das Abendmahl halten with them,
this creates a false impression. The Greek text has deipn?sô — I shall
eat supper (with him), and the English bible translates this
correctly: I shall sup with him. There is no question here of the
Eucharist even as a mere commemoration meal.

There can be no doubt that this book, with its date so originally
authenticated as the year 68 or 69, is the oldest of all Christian
literature. No other is written in such barbaric language, so full of
Hebraisms, impossible constructions and mistakes in grammar. Chapter
I, verse 4, for example, says literally: "Grace be unto you ... from
he that is being and that was and that is coming." Only professional
theologians and other historians who have a stake in it now deny that
the Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles are but later adaptations of
writings which are now lost and whose feeble historical core is now
unrecognizable in the maze of legend, that even the few Epistles
supposed by Bruno Bauer to be "authentic" are either writings of a
later date or at best adaptations of old works of unknown authors
altered by additions and insertions. It is all the more important
since we are here in possession of a book whose date of writing has
been determined to the nearest month, a book that displays to us
Christianity in its undeveloped form. This form stands in the same
relation to the fourth century state religion with its fully evolved
dogma and mythology as Tacitus's still unstable mythology of the
Germans to the developed teaching of the gods of Edda as influenced by
Christian and antique elements. The core of the universal religion is
there, but it includes without any discrimination the thousand
possibilities of development which became realities in the countless
subsequent sects. And the reason why this oldest writing of the time
when Christianity was coming into being is especially valuable for us
is that it shows without any dilution what Judaism, strongly
influenced by Alexandria, contributed to Christianity. All that comes
later is western, Greco-Roman addition. It was only by the
intermediary of the monotheistic Jewish religion that- the cultured
monotheism of later Greek vulgar philosophy could clothe itself in the
religious form in which alone it could grip the masses. But once this
intermediary found, it could become a universal religion only in the
Greco-Roman world, and that by further development in and merging with
the thought material that world had achieved.