

CRITIQUE OF THE GOTHA PROGRAMME


Karl Marx

1875

Written: April or early May, 1875;
Source: Marx/Engels Selected Works, Volume Three, p. 13-30;
Publisher: Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1970;
First Published: Abridged in the journal _Die Neue Zeit_, Bd. 1, No. 18,
1890-91;
Online Version: mea; marxists.org 1999;
Transcribed: Zodiac and Brian Baggins;
HTML Markup: Brian Baggins.
HTML Source: http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1875/gotha/


Contents

Background
Foreword
Marx to Bracke
Engels to Bebel
Part I
Part II
Part III
Part IV
Appendix


Background

Critique of the Gotha Programme is a critique of the draft programme of
the United Workers' Party of Germany. In this document Marx address the
dictatorship of the proletariat, the period of transition from
capitalism to communism, the two phases of communist society, the
production and distribution of the social goods, proletarian
internationalism, and the party of the working class.

Lenin later wrote:

The great significance of Marx's explanation is, that here too, he
consistently applies materialist dialectics, the theory of development,
and regards communism as something which develops _out of_ capitalism.
Instead of scholastically invented, 'concocted' definitions and
fruitless disputes over words (What is socialism? What is communism?),
Marx gives analysis of what might be called the stages of the economic
maturity of communism.

(Lenin Collected Works, Volume 25, p. 471)

Engels wrote a foreword when the document was first published in 1891.
Together with the _Critique of the Gotha Programme_ Engels published
Marx's letter to Bracke, directly bound up with the work.


Foreword

The manuscript published here — the covering letter to Bracke as well as
the critique of the draft programme — was sent in 1875, shortly before
the Gotha Unity Congress, to Bracke for communication to Geib, Auer,
Bebel [1], and Liebknecht and subsequent return to Marx. Since the Halle
Party Congress has put the discussion of the Gotha Programme on the
agenda of the Party, I think I would be guilty of suppression if I any
longer withheld from publicity this important — perhaps the most
important — document relevant to this discussion.

But the manuscript has yet another and more far-reaching significance.
Here for the first time Marx's attitude to the line adopted by Lassalle
in his agitation from the very beginning is clearly and firmly set
forth, both as regards Lassalle's economic principles and his tactics.

The ruthless severity with which the draft programme is dissected here,
the mercilessness with which the results obtained are enunciated and the
shortcomings of the draft laid bare — all this today, after fifteen
years, can no longer give offence. Specific Lassalleans now exist only
abroad as isolated ruins, and in Halle the Gotha Programme was given up
even by its creators as altogether inadequate.

Nevertheless, I have omitted a few sharp personal expressions and
judgments where these were immaterial, and replaced them by dots. Marx
himself would have done so if he had published the manuscript today. The
violence of the language in some passages was provoked by two
circumstances. In the first place, Marx and I had been more intimately
connected with the German movement than with any other; we were,
therefore, bound to be particularly perturbed by the decidedly
retrograde step manifested by this draft programme. And secondly, we
were at that time, hardly two years after the Hague Congress of the
International, engaged in the most violent struggle against Bakunin and
his anarchists, who made us responsible for everything that happened in
the labour movement in Germany; hence we had to expect that we would
also be addled with the secret paternity of this programme. These
considerations do not now exist and so there is no necessity for the
passages in question.

For reasons arising form the Press Law, also, a few sentences have been
indicated only by dots. Where I have had to choose a milder expression
this has been enclosed in square brackets. Otherwise the text has been
reproduced word for word.

London, January 6, 1891

Footnotes

[1] Before the _Critique of the Gotha Programme_ was written, Engels
wrote a letter to August Bebel expressing Marx and Engels' surprise at
the programme, and going on to criticise it.


Marx to W. Bracke In Brunswick

London, 5 May 1875

Dear Bracke,

When you have read the following critical marginal notes on the Unity
Programme, would you be so good as to send them on to Geib and Auer,
Bebel and Liebknecht for examination. I am exceedingly busy and have to
overstep by far the limit of work allowed me by the doctors. Hence it
was anything but a “pleasure” to write such a lengthy creed. It was,
however, necessary so that the steps to be taken by me later on would
not be misinterpreted by our friends in the Party for whom this
communication is intended.

After the Unity Congress has been held, Engels and I will publish a
short statement to the effect that our position is altogether remote
from the said programme of principle and that we have nothing to do with
it.

This is indispensable because the opinion – the entirely erroneous
opinion – is held abroad and assiduously nurtured by enemies of the
Party that we secretly guide from here the movement of the so-called
Eisenach Party. In a Russian book [_Statism and Anarchy_] that has
recently appeared, Bakunin still makes me responsible, for example, not
only for all the programmes, etc., of that party but even for every step
taken by Liebknecht from the day of his cooperation with the People's
Party.

Apart from this, it is my duty not to give recognition, even by
diplomatic silence, to what in my opinion is a thoroughly objectionable
programme that demoralises the Party.

_Every step of real movement is more important than a dozen programmes_.
If, therefore, it was not possible – and the conditions of the item did
not permit it – to go _beyond_ the Eisenach programme, one should simply
have concluded an agreement for action against the common enemy. But by
drawing up a programme of principles (instead of postponing this until
it has been prepared for by a considerable period of common activity)
one sets up before the whole world landmarks by which it measures the
level of the Party movement.

The Lassallean leaders came because circumstances forced them to. If
they had been told in advance that there would be haggling about
principles, they would _have had_ to be content with a programme of
action or a plan of organisation for common action. Instead of this, one
permits them to arrive armed with mandates, recognises these mandates on
one's part as binding, and thus surrenders unconditionally to those who
are themselves in need of help. To crown the whole business, they are
holding a congress _before the Congress of Compromise_, while one's own
party is holding its congress _post festum_. One had obviously had a
desire to stifle all criticism and to give one's own party no
opportunity for reflection. One knows that the mere fact of unification
is satisfying to the workers, but it is a mistake to believe that this
momentary success is not bought too dearly.

For the rest, the programme is no good, even apart from its
sanctification of the Lassallean articles of faith.

I shall be sending you in the near future the last parts of the French
edition of _Capital_. The printing was held up for a considerable time
by a ban of the French Government. The thing will be ready this week or
the beginning of next week. Have you received the previous six parts?
Please let me have the address of Bernhard Becker, to whom I must also
send the final parts.

The bookshop of the Volksstaat has peculiar ways of doing things. Up to
this moment, for example, I have not been sent a single copy of the
_Cologne Communist Trial_.

With best regards,

Yours,

Karl Marx


Engels to August Bebel In Zwickau

[1]

London, March 18-28, 1875

Dear Bebel,

I have received your letter of February 23 and am glad to hear that you
are in such good bodily health.

You ask me what we think of the unification affair. We are,
unfortunately, in exactly the same boat as yourself. Neither Liebknecht
nor anyone else has let us have any kind of information, and hence we
too know only what is in the papers — not that there was anything in
them until a week or so ago, when the draft programme appeared. That
astonished us not a little, I must say.

Our party had so often held out a conciliatory hand to the Lassalleans,
or at least proffered co-operation, only to be rebuffed so often and so
contemptuously by the Hasenclevers, Hasselmanns and Tolckes as to lead
any child to the conclusion that, should these gentlemen now come and
themselves proffer conciliation, they must be in a hell of a dilemma.
Knowing full well what these people are like, however, it behoves us to
make the most of that dilemma and insist on every conceivable guarantee
that might prevent these people from restoring, at our party’s expense,
their shattered reputation in general working-class opinion. They should
be given an exceedingly cool and cautious reception, and union be made
dependent on the degree of their readiness to abandon their sectarian
slogans and their state aid, ^([2]) and to accept in its essentials the
Eisenach Programme of 1869 ^([3]) or an improved edition of it adapted
to the present day. Our party has _absolutely nothing to learn_ from the
Lassalleans in the theoretical sphere, i.e. the crux of the matter where
the programme is concerned, but the Lassalleans doubtless have something
to learn from the party; the first prerequisite for union was that they
cease to be sectarians, Lassalleans, i.e. that, first and foremost, they
should, if not wholly relinquish the universal panacea of state aid, at
least admit it to be a secondary provisional measure alongside and
amongst many others recognised as possible. The draft programme shows
that our people, while infinitely superior to the Lassallean leaders in
matters of theory, are far from being a match for them where political
guile is concerned; once again the “honest men” ^([4]) have been cruelly
done in the eye by the dishonest.

To begin with, they adopt the high-sounding but historically false
Lassallean dictum: in relation to the working class all other classes
are only one reactionary mass. This proposition is true only in certain
exceptional instances, for example in the case of a revolution by the
proletariat, e.g. the Commune, or in a country in which not only has the
bourgeoisie constructed state and society after its own image but the
democratic petty bourgeoisie, in its wake, has already carried that
reconstruction to its logical conclusion. If, for instance, in Germany,
the democratic petty bourgeoisie were part of this reactionary mass,
then how could the Social-Democratic Workers’ Party have gone hand in
hand with it, with the People’s Party, ^([5]) for years on end? How
could the _Volksstaat_ derive virtually all its political content from
the petty-bourgeois democratic _Frankfurter Zeitung_? And how can one
explain the adoption in this same programme of no less than seven
demands that coincide exactly and word for word with the programme of
the People’s Party and of petty-bourgeois democracy? I mean the seven
political demands, 1 to 5 and 1 to 2, of which there is not one that is
not bourgeois-democratic. ^([6])

Secondly, the principle that the workers’ movement is an international
one is, to all intents and purposes, utterly denied in respect of the
present, and this by men who, for the space of five years and under the
most difficult conditions, upheld that principle in the most laudable
manner. The German workers’ position in the van of the European movement
rests _essentially_ on their genuinely international attitude during the
war ^([7]); no other proletariat would have behaved so well. And now
this principle is to be denied by them at a moment when, everywhere
abroad, workers are stressing it all the more by reason of the efforts
made by governments to suppress every attempt at its practical
application in an organisation! And what is left of the internationalism
of the workers’ movement? The dim prospect — not even of subsequent
co-operation among European workers with a view to their liberation —
nay, but of a future “international brotherhood of peoples” — of your
Peace League bourgeois “United States of Europe"! ^([8])

There was, of course, no need whatever to mention the International as
such. But at the very least there should have been no going back on the
programme of 1869, and some sort of statement to the effect that,
_though first of all_ the German workers’ party is acting within the
limits set by its political frontiers (it has no right to speak in the
name of the European proletariat, especially when what it says is
wrong), it is nevertheless conscious of its solidarity with the workers
of all other countries and will, as before, always be ready to meet the
obligations that solidarity entails. Such obligations, even if one does
not definitely proclaim or regard oneself as part of the
“International,” consist for example in aid, abstention from
blacklegging during strikes, making sure that the party organs keep
German workers informed of the movement abroad, agitation against
impending or incipient dynastic wars and, during such wars, an attitude
such as was exemplarily maintained in 1870 and 1871, etc.

Thirdly, our people have allowed themselves to be saddled with the
Lassallean “iron law of wages” which is based on a completely outmoded
economic view, namely that on average the workers receive only the
minimum wage because, according to the Malthusian theory of population,
there are always too many workers (such was Lassalle’s reasoning). Now
in _Capital_ Marx has amply demonstrated that the laws governing wages
are very complex, that, according to circumstances, now this law, now
that, holds sway, that they are therefore by no means iron but are, on
the contrary, exceedingly elastic, and that the subject really cannot be
dismissed in a few words, as Lassalle imagined. Malthus’ argument, upon
which the law Lassalle derived from him and Ricardo (whom he
misinterpreted) is based, as that argument appears, for instance, on p.
5 of the _Arbeiterlesebuch_, where it is quoted from another pamphlet of
Lassalle’s, ^([9]) is exhaustively refuted by Marx in the section on
“Accumulation of Capital.” Thus, by adopting the Lassallean “iron law”
one commits oneself to a false proposition and false reasoning in
support of the same.

Fourthly, as its _one and only social_ demand, the programme puts
forward — Lassallean state aid in its starkest form, as stolen by
Lassalle from Buchez. ^([10]) And this, after Bracke has so ably
demonstrated the sheer futility of that demand; after almost all if not
all, of our party speakers have, in their struggle against the
Lassalleans, been compelled to make a stand against this “state aid"!
Our party could hardly demean itself further. Internationalism sunk to
the level of Amand Goegg, socialism to that of the bourgeois republican
Buchez, who _confronted the socialists_ with this demand in order to
supplant them!

But “state aid” in the Lassallean sense of the word is, after all, at
most only _one_ measure among many others for the attainment of an end
here lamely described as “paving the way for the solution of the social
question,” as though in our case there were still a social _question_
that remained _unsolved_ in theory! Thus, if you were to say: The German
workers’ party strives to abolish wage labour and hence class
distinctions by introducing co-operative production into industry and
agriculture, and on a national scale; it is in favour of any measure
calculated to attain that end! — then no Lassallean could possibly
object.

Fifthly, there is absolutely no mention of the organisation of the
working class as a class through the medium of trade unions. And that is
a point of the utmost importance, this being the proletariat’s true
class organisation in which it fights its daily battles with capital, in
which it trains itself and which nowadays can no longer simply be
smashed, even with reaction at its worst (as presently in Paris).
Considering the importance this organisation is likewise assuming in
Germany, it would in our view be indispensable to accord it some mention
in the programme and, possibly, to leave some room for it in the
organisation of the party.

All these things have been done by our people to oblige the Lassalleans.
And what have the others conceded? That a host of somewhat muddled and
_purely democratic demands_ should figure in the programme, some of them
being of a purely fashionable nature — for instance “legislation by the
people” such as exists in Switzerland and does more harm than good, if
it can be said to do anything at all. _Administration_ by the people —
that would at least be something. Similarly omitted is the first
prerequisite of all liberty — that all officials be responsible for all
their official actions to every citizen before the ordinary courts and
in accordance with common law. That demands such as freedom of science
and freedom of conscience figure in every liberal bourgeois programme
and seem a trifle out of place here is something I shall not enlarge
upon.

The free people’s state is transformed into the free state.
Grammatically speaking, a free state is one in which the state is free
vis-à-vis its citizens, a state, that is, with a despotic government.
All the palaver about the state ought to be dropped, especially after
the Commune, which had ceased to be a state in the true sense of the
term. The _people’s state_ has been flung in our teeth _ad nauseam_ by
the anarchists, although Marx’s anti-Proudhon piece and after it the
_Communist Manifesto_ declare outright that, with the introduction of
the socialist order of society, the state will dissolve of itself and
disappear. Now, since the state is merely a transitional institution of
which use is made in the struggle, in the revolution, to keep down one’s
enemies by force, it is utter nonsense to speak of a free people’s
state; so long as the proletariat still _makes use_ of the state, it
makes use of it, not for the purpose of freedom, but of keeping down its
enemies and, as soon as there can be any question of freedom, the state
as such ceases to exist. We would therefore suggest that _Gemeinwesen_
["commonalty"] be universally substituted for _state;_ it is a good old
German word that can very well do service for the French “Commune.”

"The elimination of all social and political inequality,” rather than
“the abolition of all class distinctions,” is similarly a most dubious
expression. As between one country, one province and even one place and
another, living conditions will always evince a _certain_ inequality
which may be reduced to a minimum but never wholly eliminated. The
living conditions of Alpine dwellers will always be different from those
of the plainsmen. The concept of a socialist society as a realm of
_equality is_ a one-sided French concept deriving from the old “liberty,
equality, fraternity,” a concept which was justified in that, in its own
time and place, it signified a _phase of development_, but which, like
all the one-sided ideas of earlier socialist schools, ought now to be
superseded, since they produce nothing but mental confusion, and more
accurate ways of presenting the matter have been discovered.

I shall desist, although almost every word in this programme, a
programme which is, moreover, insipidly written, lays itself open to
criticism. It is such that, should it be adopted, Marx and I could
_never_ recognise a _new_ party set up on that basis and shall have to
consider most seriously what attitude — public as well as private — we
should adopt towards it. ^([11]) Remember that abroad _we_ are held
responsible for any and every statement and action of the German
Social-Democratic Workers’ Party. E.g. by Bakunin in his work _Statehood
and Anarchy_, in which we are made to answer for every injudicious word
spoken or written by Liebknecht since the inception of the
_Demokratisches Wochenblatt._ People imagine that we run the whole show
from here, whereas you know as well as I do that we have hardly ever
interfered in the least with internal party affairs, and then only in an
attempt to make good, as far as possible, what we considered to have
been blunders — and _only theoretical_ blunders at that. But, as you
yourself will realise, this programme marks a turning-point which may
very well force us to renounce any kind of responsibility in regard to
the party that adopts it.

Generally speaking, less importance attaches to the official programme
of a party than to what it does. But a _new_ programme is after all a
banner planted in public, and the outside world judges the party by it.
Hence, whatever happens there should be no going-back, as there is here,
on the Eisenach programme. It should further be considered what the
workers of other countries will think of this programme; what impression
will be created by this genuflection on the part of the entire German
socialist proletariat before Lassalleanism.

I am, moreover, convinced that a union on _this_ basis would not last a
year. Are the best minds of our party to descend to repeating,
parrot-fashion, Lassallean maxims concerning the iron law of wages and
state aid? I’d like to see you, for one, thus employed! And were they to
do so, their audiences would hiss them off the stage. And I feel sure
that it is precisely on _these_ bits of the programme that the
Lassalleans are insisting, like Shylock the Jew on his pound of flesh.
The split will come; but we shall have “made honest men” again of
Hasselmann, Hasenclever and Tolcke and Co.; we shall emerge from the
split weaker and the Lassalleans stronger; our party will have lost its
political virginity and will never again be able to come out
whole-heartedly against the Lassallean maxims which for a time it
inscribed on its own banner; and then, should the Lassalleans again
declare themselves to be the sole and most genuine workers’ party and
our people to be bourgeois, the programme would be there to prove it.
All the socialist measures in it are _theirs_, and _our_ party has
introduced nothing save the demands of that petty-bourgeois democracy
which it has _itself_ described in that same programme as part of the
“reactionary mass"!

I had held this letter back in view of the fact that you would only be
released on April 1, in honour of Bismarck’s birthday, ^([12]) not
wanting to expose it to the risk of interception in the course of an
attempt to smuggle it in. Well, I have just had a letter from Bracke,
who has also felt grave doubts about the programme and asks for our
opinion. I shall therefore send this letter to him for forwarding, so
that he can read it without my having to write the whole thing over
again. I have, by the way, also spoken my mind to Ramm; to Liebknecht I
wrote but briefly. I cannot forgive his not having told us a _single
word_ about the whole business (whereas Ramm and others believed he had
given us exact information) until it was, in a manner of speaking, too
late. True, this has always been his wont — hence the large amount of
disagreeable correspondence which we, both Marx and myself, have had
with him, but this time it really is too bad, and _we definitely shan’t
act in concert with him._

Do see that you manage to come here in the summer; you would, of course,
stay with me and, if the weather is fine, we might spend a day or two
taking sea baths, which would really do you good after your long spell
in jail.

Ever your friend,

F. E.

Marx has just moved house. He is living at 41 Maitland Park Crescent, NW
London.

Footnotes

1. Engels’ letter to August Bebel written between March 18 and 28, 1875
is closely connected with Marx’s _Critique of the Gotha Programme_ and
is traditionally published together with the latter work. It conveyed
the joint opinion of Marx and Engels concerning the fusion of two German
workers’ parties, the Eisenachers and the Lassalleans, scheduled for
early 1875. The immediate reason for the letter was the publication of
the draft programme of the future united Social-Democratic Workers’
Party of Germany _(Programm der deutschen Arbeiterpartei)_ in _Der
Volksstaat_ (the organ of the Eisenachers) and the _Neuer
Social-Demokrat_ (the organ of the Lassalleans) on March 7, 1875. The
draft programme was approved with slight changes by the unity congress
at Gotha on May 22-27, 1875, and came to be known as the Gotha
Programme.

This letter was first published by Bebel, after the lapse of 36 years,
in his _Aus meinem Leben_, Zweiter Teil, Stuttgart, 1911. In the present
edition the letter is printed according to this book.

It was published in English for the first time in: K. Marx, _Critique of
the Gotha Programme_, Lawrence, London [1933], pp. 51-62.

2. A reference to one of Lassalle’s programme theses on the
establishment of workers’ producer associations with the aid of the
state. Lassalle and his followers repeatedly emphasised that what they
had in mind was a state in which power would pass into the hands of the
working people through universal suffrage.

3. Engels is referring to the _Programm und Statuten der
sozial-demokratischen Arbeiter-Partei_, adopted at the general German
workers’ congress in Eisenach in August 1869 and published in the
_Demokratisches Wochenblatt_ on August 14, 1869. The congress founded
the Social-Democratic Workers’ Party of Germany. By and large the
programme complied with the principles of the International Working
Men’s Association.

4. The _"honest men” —_ nickname of the members of the Social-Democratic
Workers’ Party (the Eisenachers), as distinct from the members of the
General Association of German Workers (the Lassalleans), the “dishonest
men.”

5. The _German People’s Party_, established in September 1868, embraced
the democratic section of the bourgeoisie, mostly in the South-German
states. The party opposed the establishment of Prussian hegemony in
Germany and advocated the idea of a federative German state.

6. A reference to the following articles of the draft Gotha Programme:

"The German workers’ party demands as the free basis of the state:

"1. Universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot for all males
who have reached the age of 21, for all elections in the state and in
the community. 2. Direct legislation by the people with the right to
initiate and to reject bills. 3. Universal military training. A people’s
militia in place of the standing army. Decisions regarding war and peace
to be taken by a representative assembly of the people. 4. Abolition of
all exceptional laws, in particular the laws on the press, associations
and assembly. 5. Jurisdiction by the people. Administration of justice
without fees.

"The German workers’ party demands as the intellectual and moral basis
of the state:

"1. Universal and equal education of the people by the state. Compulsory
school attendance. Free instruction. 2. Freedom of science. Freedom of
conscience."

7. The reference is to the Franco-Prussian war of 1870-71.

8. The _League of Peace and Freedom_ — A pacifist organisation set up in
Switzerland in 1867 with the active participation of Victor Hugo,
Giuseppe Garibaldi and other democrats. The League asserted that it was
possible to prevent wars by creating the “United States of Europe.” Its
leaders did not disclose the social sources of wars and often confined
anti-militarist activity to mere declarations. At the General Council
meeting of August 13, 1867 Marx spoke against the International’s
official participation in the League’s Inaugural Congress, since this
would have meant solidarity with its bourgeois programme, but
recommended that some members of the International should attend the
Congress in their personal capacity in order to support
revolutionary-democratic decisions (see Marx’s letter to Engels of
September 4, 1867).

9. On page 5 of his _Arbeiterlesebuch_ Lassalle quotes a passage about
the “iron law of wages” from his pamphlet _Offnes Antwortschreiben an
das Central-Comite zur Berufung eines Allgemeinen Deutschen
Arbeitercongresses zu Leipzig_, Zurich, 1863, pp. 15-16.

10. Philippe Joseph Buchez, one of the first ideologists of the
so-called Christian socialism, advanced a plan for the establishment of
workers’ producer associations with the aid of the state.

11. On October 12, 1875 Engels wrote to Bebel concerning this programme
that, since both workers and their political opponents “interpreted it
communistically,” “_it is this circumstance alone_ which has made it
possible for Marx and myself not to disassociate ourselves publicly from
a programme such as this. So long as our opponents as well as the
workers continue to read our views into that programme, we are justified
in saying nothing about it.”

12. In March 1872 August Bebel and Wilhelm Liebknecht were sentenced to
two years’ confinement in a fortress for their adhesion to the
International Working Men’s Association and their socialist views. In
April Bebel was sentenced, in addition, to nine months’ imprisonment and
deprived of his mandate as a Reichstag member for “insulting His
Majesty.” Liebknecht was released on April 15, 1874, while Bebel was
freed on April 1, 1875.


Part I

1. "Labor is the source of wealth and all culture, and since useful
labor is possible only in society and through society, the proceeds of
labor belong undiminished with equal right to all members of society."

_First part of the paragraph_: "Labor is the source of all wealth and
all culture."

Labor is _not the source_ of all wealth. _Nature_ is just as much the
source of use values (and it is surely of such that material wealth
consists!) as labor, which itself is only the manifestation of a force
of nature, human labor power. The above phrase is to be found in all
children's primers and is correct insofar as it is implied that labor is
performed with the appurtenant subjects and instruments. But a socialist
program cannot allow such bourgeois phrases to pass over in silence the
_conditions_ that lone give them meaning. And insofar as man from the
beginning behaves toward nature, the primary source of all instruments
and subjects of labor, as an owner, treats her as belonging to him, his
labor becomes the source of use values, therefore also of wealth. The
bourgeois have very good grounds for falsely ascribing _supernatural
creative power_ to labor; since precisely from the fact that labor
depends on nature it follows that the man who possesses no other
property than his labor power must, in all conditions of society and
culture, be the slave of other men who have made themselves the owners
of the material conditions of labor. He can only work with their
permission, hence live only with their permission.

Let us now leave the sentence as it stands, or rather limps. What could
one have expected in conclusion? Obviously this:

"Since labor is the source of all wealth, no one in society can
appropriate wealth except as the product of labor. Therefore, if he
himself does not work, he lives by the labor of others and also acquires
his culture at the expense of the labor of others."

Instead of this, by means of the verbal river "and since", a proposition
is added in order to draw a conclusion from this and not from the first
one.

_Second part of the paragraph_: "Useful labor is possible only in
society and through society."

According to the first proposition, labor was the source of all wealth
and all culture; therefore no society is possible without labor. Now we
learn, conversely, that no "useful" labor is possible without society.

One could just as well have said that only in society can useless and
even socially harmful labor become a branch of gainful occupation, that
only in society can one live by being idle, etc., etc. — in short, once
could just as well have copied the whole of Rousseau.

And what is "useful" labor? Surely only labor which produces the
intended useful result. A savage — and man was a savage after he had
ceased to be an ape — who kills an animal with a stone, who collects
fruit, etc., performs "useful" labor.

_Thirdly, the conclusion_: "Useful labor is possible only in society and
through society, the proceeds of labor belong undiminished with equal
right to all members of society."

A fine conclusion! If useful labor is possible only in society and
through society, the proceeds of labor belong to society — and only so
much therefrom accrues to the individual worker as is not required to
maintain the "condition" of labor, society.

In fact, this proposition has at all times been made use of by the
champions of the _state of society prevailing at any given time_. First
comes the claims of the government and everything that sticks to it,
since it is the social organ for the maintenance of the social order;
then comes the claims of the various kinds of private property, for the
various kinds of private property are the foundations of society, etc.
One sees that such hollow phrases are the foundations of society, etc.
One sees that such hollow phrases can be twisted and turned as desired.

The first and second parts of the paragraph have some intelligible
connection only in the following wording:

"Labor becomes the source of wealth and culture only as social labor",
or, what is the same thing, "in and through society".

This proposition is incontestably correct, for although isolated labor
(its material conditions presupposed) can create use value, it can
create neither wealth nor culture.

But equally incontestable is this other proposition:

"In proportion as labor develops socially, and becomes thereby a source
of wealth and culture, poverty and destitution develop among the
workers, and wealth and culture among the nonworkers."

This is the law of all history hitherto. What, therefore, had to be done
here, instead of setting down general phrases about "labor" and
"society", was to prove concretely how in present capitalist society the
material, etc., conditions have at last been created which enable and
compel the workers to lift this social curse.

In fact, however, the whole paragraph, bungled in style and content, is
only there in order to inscribe the Lassallean catchword of the
"undiminished proceeds of labor" as a slogan at the top of the party
banner. I shall return later to the "proceeds of labor", "equal right",
etc., since the same thing recurs in a somewhat different form further
on.

2. "In present-day society, the instruments of labor are the monopoly of
the capitalist class; the resulting dependence of the working class is
the cause of misery and servitude in all forms."

This sentence, borrowed from the Rules of the International, is
incorrect in this "improved" edition.

In present-day society, the instruments of labor are the monopoly of the
landowners (the monopoly of property in land is even the basis of the
monopoly of capital) _and_ the capitalists. In the passage in question,
the Rules of the International do not mention either one or the other
class of monopolists. They speak of the "monopolizer of the means of
labor, that is, _the sources of life_." The addition, "sources of life",
makes it sufficiently clear that land is included in the instruments of
labor.

The correction was introduced because Lassalle, for reasons now
generally known, attacked _only_ the capitalist class and not the
landowners. In England, the capitalist class is usually not even the
owner of the land on which his factory stands.

3. "The emancipation of labor demands the promotion of the instruments
of labor to the common property of society and the co-operative
regulation of the total labor, with a fair distribution of the proceeds
of labor.

"Promotion of the instruments of labor to the common property" ought
obviously to read their "conversion into the common property"; but this
is only passing.

What are the "proceeds of labor"? The product of labor, or its value?
And in the latter case, is it the total value of the product, or only
that part of the value which labor has newly added to the value of the
means of production consumed?

"Proceeds of labor" is a loose notion which Lassalle has put in the
place of definite economic conceptions.

What is "a fair distribution"?

Do not the bourgeois assert that the present-day distribution is "fair"?
And is it not, in fact, the only "fair" distribution on the basis of the
present-day mode of production? Are economic relations regulated by
legal conceptions, or do not, on the contrary, legal relations arise out
of economic ones? Have not also the socialist sectarians the most varied
notions about "fair" distribution?

To understand what is implied in this connection by the phrase "fair
distribution", we must take the first paragraph and this one together.
The latter presupposes a society wherein the instruments of labor are
common property and the total labor is co-operatively regulated, and
from the first paragraph we learn that "the proceeds of labor belong
undiminished with equal right to all members of society."

"To all members of society"? To those who do not work as well? What
remains then of the "undiminished" proceeds of labor? Only to those
members of society who work? What remains then of the "equal right" of
all members of society?

But "all members of society" and "equal right" are obviously mere
phrases. The kernel consists in this, that in this communist society
every worker must receive the "undiminished" Lassallean "proceeds of
labor".

Let us take, first of all, the words "proceeds of labor" in the sense of
the product of labor; then the co-operative proceeds of labor are the
_total social product_.

From this must now be deducted: _First_, cover for replacement of the
means of production used up. _Second_, additional portion for expansion
of production. _Third_, reserve or insurance funds to provide against
accidents, dislocations caused by natural calamities, etc.

These deductions from the "undiminished" proceeds of labor are an
economic necessity, and their magnitude is to be determined according to
available means and forces, and partly by computation of probabilities,
but they are in no way calculable by equity.

There remains the other part of the total product, intended to serve as
means of consumption.

Before this is divided among the individuals, there has to be deducted
again, from it: _First_, the general costs of administration not
belonging to production. This part will, from the outset, be very
considerably restricted in comparison with present-day society, and it
diminishes in proportion as the new society develops. _Second_, that
which is intended for the common satisfaction of needs, such as schools,
health services, etc. From the outset, this part grows considerably in
comparison with present-day society, and it grows in proportion as the
new society develops. _Third_, funds for those unable to work, etc., in
short, for what is included under so-called official poor relief today.

Only now do we come to the "distribution" which the program, under
Lassallean influence, alone has in view in its narrow fashion — namely,
to that part of the means of consumption which is divided among the
individual producers of the co-operative society.

The "undiminished" proceeds of labor have already unnoticeably become
converted into the "diminished" proceeds, although what the producer is
deprived of in his capacity as a private individual benefits him
directly or indirectly in his capacity as a member of society.

Just as the phrase of the "undiminished" proceeds of labor has
disappeared, so now does the phrase of the "proceeds of labor" disappear
altogether.

Within the co-operative society based on common ownership of the means
of production, the producers do not exchange their products; just as
little does the labor employed on the products appear here as the
_value_ of these products, as a material quality possessed by them,
since now, in contrast to capitalist society, individual labor no longer
exists in an indirect fashion but directly as a component part of total
labor. The phrase "proceeds of labor", objectionable also today on
account of its ambiguity, thus loses all meaning.

What we have to deal with here is a communist society, not as it has
_developed_ on its own foundations, but, on the contrary, just as it
_emerges_ from capitalist society; which is thus in every respect,
economically, morally, and intellectually, still stamped with the
birthmarks of the old society from whose womb it emerges. Accordingly,
the individual producer receives back from society — after the
deductions have been made — exactly what he gives to it. What he has
given to it is his individual quantum of labor. For example, the social
working day consists of the sum of the individual hours of work; the
individual labor time of the individual producer is the part of the
social working day contributed by him, his share in it. He receives a
certificate from society that he has furnished such-and-such an amount
of labor (after deducting his labor for the common funds); and with this
certificate, he draws from the social stock of means of consumption as
much as the same amount of labor cost. The same amount of labor which he
has given to society in one form, he receives back in another.

Here, obviously, the same principle prevails as that which regulates the
exchange of commodities, as far as this is exchange of equal values.
Content and form are changed, because under the altered circumstances no
one can give anything except his labor, and because, on the other hand,
nothing can pass to the ownership of individuals, except individual
means of consumption. But as far as the distribution of the latter among
the individual producers is concerned, the same principle prevails as in
the exchange of commodity equivalents: a given amount of labor in one
form is exchanged for an equal amount of labor in another form.

Hence, _equal right_ here is still in principle — _bourgeois right_,
although principle and practice are no longer at loggerheads, while the
exchange of equivalents in commodity exchange exists only on the average
and not in the individual case.

In spite of this advance, this equal right is still constantly
stigmatized by a bourgeois limitation. The right of the producers is
_proportional_ to the labor they supply; the equality consists in the
fact that measurement is made with an _equal standard_, labor.

But one man is superior to another physically, or mentally, and supplies
more labor in the same time, or can labor for a longer time; and labor,
to serve as a measure, must be defined by its duration or intensity,
otherwise it ceases to be a standard of measurement. This _equal_ right
is an unequal right for unequal labor. It recognizes no class
differences, because everyone is only a worker like everyone else; but
it tacitly recognizes unequal individual endowment, and thus productive
capacity, as a natural privilege. It is, therefore, a right of
inequality, in its content, like every right. Right, by its very nature,
can consist only in the application of an equal standard; but unequal
individuals (and they would not be different individuals if they were
not unequal) are measurable only by an equal standard insofar as they
are brought under an equal point of view, are taken from one definite
side only — for instance, in the present case, are regarded _only as
workers_ and nothing more is seen in them, everything else being
ignored. Further, one worker is married, another is not; one has more
children than another, and so on and so forth. Thus, with an equal
performance of labor, and hence an equal in the social consumption fund,
one will in fact receive more than another, one will be richer than
another, and so on. To avoid all these defects, right, instead of being
equal, would have to be unequal.

But these defects are inevitable in the first phase of communist society
as it is when it has just emerged after prolonged birth pangs from
capitalist society. Right can never be higher than the economic
structure of society and its cultural development conditioned thereby.

In a higher phase of communist society, after the enslaving
subordination of the individual to the division of labor, and therewith
also the antithesis between mental and physical labor, has vanished;
after labor has become not only a means of life but life's prime want;
after the productive forces have also increased with the all-around
development of the individual, and all the springs of co-operative
wealth flow more abundantly — only then then can the narrow horizon of
bourgeois right be crossed in its entirety and society inscribe on its
banners: From each according to his ability, to each according to his
needs!

I have dealt more at length with the "undiminished" proceeds of labor,
on the one hand, and with "equal right" and "fair distribution", on the
other, in order to show what a crime it is to attempt, on the one hand,
to force on our Party again, as dogmas, ideas which in a certain period
had some meaning but have now become obsolete verbal rubbish, while
again perverting, on the other, the realistic outlook, which it cost so
much effort to instill into the Party but which has now taken root in
it, by means of ideological nonsense about right and other trash so
common among the democrats and French socialists.

Quite apart from the analysis so far given, it was in general a mistake
to make a fuss about so-called distribution and put the principal stress
on it.

Any distribution whatever of the means of consumption is only a
consequence of the distribution of the conditions of production
themselves. The latter distribution, however, is a feature of the mode
of production itself. The capitalist mode of production, for example,
rests on the fact that the material conditions of production are in the
hands of nonworkers in the form of property in capital and land, while
the masses are only owners of the personal condition of production, of
labor power. If the elements of production are so distributed, then the
present-day distribution of the means of consumption results
automatically. If the material conditions of production are the
co-operative property of the workers themselves, then there likewise
results a distribution of the means of consumption different from the
present one. Vulgar socialism (and from it in turn a section of the
democrats) has taken over from the bourgeois economists the
consideration and treatment of distribution as independent of the mode
of production and hence the presentation of socialism as turning
principally on distribution. After the real relation has long been made
clear, why retrogress again?

4. "The emancipation of labor must be the work of the working class,
relative to which all other classes are only one reactionary mass."

The first strophe is taken from the introductory words of the Rules of
the International, but "improved". There it is said: "The emancipation
of the working class must be the act of the workers themselves"; here,
on the contrary, the "working class" has to emancipate — what? "Labor."
Let him understand who can.

In compensation, the antistrophe, on the other hand, is a Lassallean
quotation of the first water: "relative to which" (the working class)
"all other classes are only one reactionary mass."

In the Communist Manifesto it is said:

"Of all the classes that stand face-to-face with the bourgeoisie today,
the proletariat alone is a really revolutionary class. The other classes
decay and finally disappear in the face of modern industry; the
proletariat is its special and essential product."

The bourgeoisie is here conceived as a revolutionary class — as the
bearer of large-scale industry — relative to the feudal lords and the
lower middle class, who desire to maintain all social positions that are
the creation of obsolete modes of production. thus, they do not form
together with the bourgeoisie "only one reactionary mass".

On the other hand, the proletariat is revolutionary relative to the
bourgeoisie because, having itself grown up on the basis of large-scale
industry, it strives to strip off from production the capitalist
character that the bourgeoisie seeks to perpetuate. But the _Manifesto_
adds that the "lower middle class" is becoming revolutionary "in view of
[its] impending transfer to the proletariat".

From this point of view, therefore, it is again nonsense to say that it,
together with the bourgeoisie, and with the feudal lords into the
bargain, "form only one reactionary mass" relative to the working class.

Has one proclaimed to the artisan, small manufacturers, etc., and
peasants during the last elections: Relative to us, you, together with
the bourgeoisie and feudal lords, form one reactionary mass?

Lassalle knew the _Communist Manifesto_ by heart, as his faithful
followers know the gospels written by him. If, therefore, he has
falsified it so grossly, this has occurred only to put a good color on
his alliance with absolutist and feudal opponents against the
bourgeoisie.

In the above paragraph, moreover, his oracular saying is dragged in by
main force without any connection with the botched quotation from the
Rules of the International. Thus, it is simply an impertinence, and
indeed not at all displeasing to Herr Bismarck, one of those cheap
pieces of insolence in which the Marat of Berlin deals. [ Marat of
Berlin a reference to Hasselmann, cheif editor of the _Neuer
Social-Demokrat_]

5. "The working class strives for its emancipation first of all within
the framework of the present-day national states, conscious that the
necessary result of its efforts, which are common to the workers of all
civilized countries, will be the international brotherhood of peoples."

Lassalle, in opposition to the _Communist Manifesto_ and to all earlier
socialism, conceived the workers' movement from the narrowest national
standpoint. He is being followed in this — and that after the work of
the International!

It is altogether self-evident that, to be able to fight at all, the
working class must organize itself at home _as a class_ and that its own
country is the immediate arena of its struggle — insofar as its class
struggle is national, not in substance, but, as the _Communist
Manifesto_ says, "in form". But the "framework of the present-day
national state", for instance, the German Empire, is itself, in its
turn, economically "within the framework" of the world market,
politically "within the framework" of the system of states. Every
businessman knows that German trade is at the same time foreign trade,
and the greatness of Herr Bismarck consists, to be sure, precisely in
his pursuing a kind of _international_ policy.

And to what does the German Workers' party reduce its internationalism?
To the consciousness that the result of its efforts will be "the
international brotherhood of peoples" — a phrase borrowed from the
bourgeois League of Peace and Freedom, which is intended to pass as
equivalent to the international brotherhood of working classes in the
joint struggle against the ruling classes and their governments. Not a
word, therefore, about the international functions of the German working
class! And it is thus that it is to challenge its own bourgeoisie —
which is already linked up in brotherhood against it with the bourgeois
of all other countries — and Herr Bismarck's international policy of
conspiracy.

In fact, the internationalism of the program stands _even infinitely_
_below_ that of the Free Trade party. The latter also asserts that the
result of its efforts will be "the international brotherhood of
peoples". But it also _does_ something to make trade international and
by no means contents itself with the consciousness that all people are
carrying on trade at home.

The international activity of the working classes does not in any way
depend on the existence of the International Working Men's Association.
This was only the first attempt to create a central organ for the
activity; an attempt which was a lasting success on account of the
impulse which it gave but which was no longer realizable in its
historical form after the fall of the Paris Commune.

Bismarck's Norddeutsche was absolutely right when it announced, to the
satisfaction of its master, that the German Workers' party had sworn off
internationalism in the new program.


Part II

"Starting from these basic principles, the German workers' party strives
by all legal means for the free state—and—socialist society: that
abolition of the wage system together with the iron law of wages —
and—exploitation in every form; the elimination of all social and
political inequality."

I shall return to the "free" state later.

So, in future, the German Workers' party has got to believe in
Lassalle's "iron law of wages"! That this may not be lost, the nonsense
is perpetrated of speaking of the "abolition of the wage system" (it
should read: system of wage labor), "together with the iron law of
wages". If I abolish wage labor, then naturally I abolish its laws also,
whether they are of "iron" or sponge. But Lassalle's attack on wage
labor turns almost solely on this so-called law. In order, therefore, to
prove that Lassalle's sect has conquered, the "wage system" must be
abolished "together with the iron law of wages" and not without it.

It is well known that nothing of the "iron law of wages" is Lassalle's
except the word "iron" borrowed from Goethe's "great, eternal iron
laws". [1] The word "iron" is a label by which the true believers
recognize one another. But if I take the law with Lassalle's stamp on
it, and consequently in his sense, then I must also take it with his
substantiation for it. And what is that? As Lange already showed,
shortly after Lassalle's death, it is the Malthusian theory of
population (preached by Lange himself). But if this theory is correct,
then again I cannot abolish the law even if I abolish wage labor a
hundred times over, because the law then governs not only the system of
wage labor but _every_ social system. Basing themselves directly on
this, the economists have been proving for 50 years and more that
socialism cannot abolish poverty, which has its basis in nature, but can
only make it _general_, distribute it simultaneously over the whole
surface of society!

But all this is not the main thing. Quite apart from the false
Lassallean formulation of the law, the truly outrageous retrogression
consists in the following:

Since Lassalle's death, there has asserted itself in our party the
scientific understanding that wages are not what they appear to be —
namely, the _value_, or _price_, of _labor_—but only a masked form for
the _value_, or _price_, of _labor power_. Thereby, the whole bourgeois
conception of wages hitherto, as well as all the criticism hitherto
directed against this conception, was thrown overboard once and for all.
It was made clear that the wage worker has permission to work for his
own subsistence—that is, _to live_, only insofar as he works for a
certain time gratis for the capitalist (and hence also for the latter's
co-consumers of surplus value); that the whole capitalist system of
production turns on the increase of this gratis labor by extending the
working day, or by developing the productivity—that is, increasing the
intensity or labor power, etc.; that, consequently, the system of wage
labor is a system of slavery, and indeed of a slavery which becomes more
severe in proportion as the social productive forces of labor develop,
whether the worker receives better or worse payment. And after this
understanding has gained more and more ground in our party, some return
to Lassalle's dogma although they must have known that Lassalle _did not
know_ what wages were, but, following in the wake of the bourgeois
economists, took the appearance for the essence of the matter.

It is as if, among slaves who have at last got behind the secret of
slavery and broken out in rebellion, a slave still in thrall to obsolete
notions were to inscribe on the program of the rebellion: Slavery must
be abolished because the feeding of slaves in the system of slavery
cannot exceed a certain low maximum!

Does not the mere fact that the representatives of our party were
capable of perpetrating such a monstrous attack on the understanding
that has spread among the mass of our party prove, by itself, with what
criminal levity and with what lack of conscience they set to work in
drawing up this compromise program!

Instead of the indefinite concluding phrase of the paragraph, "the
elimination of all social and political inequality", it ought to have
been said that with the abolition of class distinctions all social and
political inequality arising from them would disappear of itself.

Footnotes

[1] Quoted from Goethe's _Das Göttliche_


Part III

"The German Workers' party, in order _to pave the way to the solution of
the social question_, demands the establishment of producers'
co-operative societies _with state aid under the democratic control of
the toiling people_. The producers' co-operative societies _are to be
called into being_ for industry and agriculture on such a scale _that
the socialist organization of the total labor will arise from them._"

After the Lassallean "iron law of wages", the physic of the prophet. The
way to it is "paved" in worthy fashion. In place of the existing class
struggle appears a newspaper scribbler's phrase: "the social
_question_", to the "solution" of which one "paves the way".

Instead of arising from the revolutionary process of transformation of
society, the "socialist organization of the total labor" "arises" from
the "state aid" that the state gives to the producers' co-operative
societies and which the _state_, not the workers, "calls into being". It
is worthy of Lassalle's imagination that with state loans one can build
a new society just as well as a new railway!

From the remnants of a sense of shame, "state aid" has been put — under
the democratic control of the "toiling people".

In the first place, the majority of the "toiling people" in Germany
consists of peasants, not proletarians.

Second, "democratic" means in German "Volksherrschaftlich" [by the rule
of the people]. But what does "control by the rule of the people of the
toiling people" mean? And particularly in the case of a toiling people
which, through these demands that it puts to the state, expresses its
full consciousness that it neither rules nor is ripe for ruling!

It would be superfluous to deal here with the criticism of the recipe
prescribed by Buchez in the reign of Louis Philippe, in opposition to
the French socialists and accepted by the reactionary workers, of the
Atelier. The chief offense does not lie in having inscribed this
specific nostrum in the program, but in taking, in general, a retrograde
step from the standpoint of a class movement to that of a sectarian
movement.

That the workers desire to establish the conditions for co-operative
production on a social scale, and first of all on a national scale, in
their own country, only means that they are working to revolutionize the
present conditions of production, and it has nothing in common with the
foundation of co-operative societies with state aid. But as far as the
present co-operative societies are concerned, they are of value _only_
insofar as they are the independent creations of the workers and not
protégés either of the governments or of the bourgeois.


Part IV

I come now to the democratic section.

A. "The free basis of the state."

First of all, according to II, the German Workers' party strives for
"the free state".

Free state — what is this?

It is by no means the aim of the workers, who have got rid of the narrow
mentality of humble subjects, to set the state free. In the German
Empire, the "state" is almost as "free" as in Russia. Freedom consists
in converting the state from an organ superimposed upon society into one
completely subordinate to it; and today, too, the forms of state are
more free or less free to the extent that they restrict the "freedom of
the state".

The German Workers' party — at least if it adopts the program — shows
that its socialist ideas are not even skin-deep; in that, instead of
treating existing society (and this holds good for any future one) as
the _basis_ of the existing state (or of the future state in the case of
future society), it treats the state rather as an independent entity
that possesses its own intellectual, ethical, and libertarian bases.

And what of the riotous misuse which the program makes of the words
"present-day state", "present-day society", and of the still more
riotous misconception it creates in regard to the state to which it
addresses its demands?

"Present-day society" is capitalist society, which exists in all
civilized countries, more or less free from medieval admixture, more or
less modified by the particular historical development of each country,
more or less developed. On the other hand, the "present-day state"
changes with a country's frontier. It is different in the Prusso-German
Empire from what it is in Switzerland, and different in England from
what it is in the United States. The "present-day state" is therefore a
fiction.

Nevertheless, the different states of the different civilized countries,
in spite or their motley diversity of form, all have this in common:
that they are based on modern bourgeois society, only one more or less
capitalistically developed. They have, therefore, also certain essential
characteristics in common. In this sense, it is possible to speak of the
"present-day state" in contrast with the future, in which its present
root, bourgeois society, will have died off.

The question then arises: What transformation will the state undergo in
communist society? In other words, what social functions will remain in
existence there that are analogous to present state functions? This
question can only be answered scientifically, and one does not get a
flea-hop nearer to the problem by a thousand-fold combination of the
word 'people' with the word 'state'.

Between capitalist and communist society there lies the period of the
revolutionary transformation of the one into the other. Corresponding to
this is also a political transition period in which the state can be
nothing but _the revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat_.

Now the program does not deal with this nor with the future state of
communist society.

Its political demands contain nothing beyond the old democratic litany
familiar to all: universal suffrage, direct legislation, popular rights,
a people's militia, etc. They are a mere echo of the bourgeois People's
party, of the League of Peace and Freedom. They are all demands which,
insofar as they are not exaggerated in fantastic presentation, have
already been _realized_. Only the state to which they belong does not
lie within the borders of the German Empire, but in Switzerland, the
United States, etc. This sort of "state of the future" is a present-day
state, although existing outside the "framework" of the German Empire.

But one thing has been forgotten. Since the German Workers' party
expressly declares that it acts within "the present-day national state",
hence within its own state, the Prusso-German Empire — its demands would
indeed be otherwise largely meaningless, since one only demands what one
has not got — it should not have forgotten the chief thing, namely, that
all those pretty little gewgaws rest on the recognition of the so-called
sovereignty of the people and hence are appropriate only in a
_democratic republic_.

Since one has not the courage — and wisely so, for the circumstances
demand caution — to demand the democratic republic, as the French
workers' programs under Louis Philippe and under Louis Napoleon did, one
should not have resorted, either, to the subterfuge, neither "honest"
[1] nor decent, of demanding things which have meaning only in a
democratic republic from a state which is nothing but a police-guarded
military despotism, embellished with parliamentary forms, alloyed with a
feudal admixture, already influenced by the bourgeoisie, and
bureaucratically carpentered, and then to assure this state into the
bargain that one imagines one will be able to force such things upon it
"by legal means".

Even vulgar democracy, which sees the millennium in the democratic
republic, and has no suspicion that it is precisely in this last form of
state of bourgeois society that the class struggle has to be fought out
to a conclusion — even it towers mountains above this kind of
democratism, which keeps within the limits of what is permitted by the
police and not permitted by logic.

That, in fact, by the word "state" is meant the government machine, or
the state insofar as it forms a special organism separated from society
through division of labor, is shown by the words "the German Workers'
party demands as the economic basis of the state: a single progressive
income tax", etc. Taxes are the economic basis of the government
machinery and of nothing else. In the state of the future, existing in
Switzerland, this demand has been pretty well fulfilled. Income tax
presupposes various sources of income of the various social classes, and
hence capitalist society. It is, therefore, nothing remarkable that the
Liverpool financial reformers — bourgeois headed by Gladstone's brother
— are putting forward the same demand as the program.

B. "The German Workers' party demands as the intellectual and ethical
basis of the state:
"1. Universal and equal elementary education by the state. Universal
compulsory school attendance. Free instruction."

"Equal elementary education"? What idea lies behind these words? Is it
believed that in present-day society (and it is only with this one has
to deal) education can be _equal_ for all classes? Or is it demanded
that the upper classes also shall be compulsorily reduced to the modicum
of education — the elementary school — that alone is compatible with the
economic conditions not only of the wage-workers but of the peasants as
well?

"Universal compulsory school attendance. Free instruction." The former
exists even in Germany, the second in Switzerland and in the United
States in the case of elementary schools. If in some states of the
latter country higher education institutions are also "free", that only
means in fact defraying the cost of education of the upper classes from
the general tax receipts. Incidentally, the same holds good for "free
administration of justice" demanded under A, 5. The administration of
criminal justice is to be had free everywhere; that of civil justice is
concerned almost exclusively with conflicts over property and hence
affects almost exclusively the possessing classes. Are they to carry on
their litigation at the expense of the national coffers?

This paragraph on the schools should at least have demanded technical
schools (theoretical and practical) in combination with the elementary
school.

"Elementary education by the state" is altogether objectionable.
Defining by a general law the expenditures on the elementary schools,
the qualifications of the teaching staff, the branches of instruction,
etc., and, as is done in the United States, supervising the fulfillment
of these legal specifications by state inspectors, is a very different
thing from appointing the state as the educator of the people!
Government and church should rather be equally excluded from any
influence on the school. Particularly, indeed, in the Prusso-German
Empire (and one should not take refuge in the rotten subterfuge that one
is speaking of a "state of the future"; we have seen how matters stand
in this respect) the state has need, on the contrary, of a very stern
education by the people.

But the whole program, for all its democratic clang, is tainted through
and through by the Lassallean sect's servile belief in the state, or,
what is no better, by a democratic belief in miracles; or rather it is a
compromise between these two kinds of belief in miracles, both equally
remote from socialism.

"Freedom of science" says paragraph of the Prussian Constitution. Why,
then, here?.

"Freedom of conscience"! If one desired, at this time of the Kulturkampf
to remind liberalism of its old catchwords, it surely could have been
done only in the following form: Everyone should be able to attend his
religious as well as his bodily needs without the police sticking their
noses in. But the Workers' party ought, at any rate in this connection,
to have expressed its awareness of the fact that bourgeois "freedom of
conscience" is nothing but the toleration of all possible kinds of
religious freedom of conscience, and that for its part it endeavours
rather to liberate the conscience from the witchery of religion. But one
chooses not to transgress the "bourgeois" level.

I have now come to the end, for the appendix that now follows in the
program does not constitute a characteristic component part of it.
Hence, I can be very brief.

Footnotes

[1] Epitaph used by the Eisenachers. Here a play on words in German.


Appendix

"2. Normal working day."

In no other country has the workers' party limited itself to such an
indefinite demand, but has always fixed the length of the working day
that it considers normal under the given circumstances.

"3. Restriction of female labor and prohibition of child labor."

The standardization of the working day must include the restriction of
female labor, insofar as it relates to the duration, intermissions,
etc., of the working day; otherwise, it could only mean the exclusion of
female labor from branches of industry that are especially unhealthy for
the female body, or are objectionable morally for the female sex. If
that is what was meant, it should have been said so.

"Prohibition of child labor." Here it was absolutely essential to state
the age limit.

A general prohibition of child labor is incompatible with the existence
of large-scale industry and hence an empty, pious wish. Its realization
— if it were possible — would be reactionary, since, with a strict
regulation of the working time according to the different age groups and
other safety measures for the protection of children, an early
combination of productive labor with education is one of the most potent
means for the transformation of present-day society.

"4. State supervision of factory, workshop, and domestic industry."

In consideration of the Prusso-German state, it should definitely have
been demanded that the inspectors are to be removable only by a court of
law; that any worker can have them prosecuted for neglect of duty; that
they must belong to the medical profession.

"5. Regulation of prison labor."

A petty demand in a general workers' program. In any case, it should
have been clearly stated that there is no intention from fear of
competition to allow ordinary criminals to be treated like beasts, and
especially that there is no desire to deprive them of their sole means
of betterment, productive labor. This was surely the least one might
have expected from socialists.

"6. An effective liability law."

It should have been stated what is meant by an "effective" liability
law.

Be it noted, incidentally, that, in speaking of the normal working day,
the part of factory legislation that deals with health regulations and
safety measures, etc., has been overlooked. The liability law comes into
operation only when these regulations are infringed.

In short, this appendix also is distinguished by slovenly editing.

_Dixi et salvavi animam meam._

[I have spoken and saved my soul.]
