Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



ON THE CORRECT HANDLING OF CONTRADICTIONS AMONG THE PEOPLE


_February 27, 1957_

[Speech at the Eleventh Session (Enlarged) of the Supreme State
Conference. Comrade Mao Tsetung went over the verbatim record and made
certain additions before its publication in the _People's Daily_ on June
19, 1957.]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Our general subject is the correct handling of contradictions among the
people. For convenience, let us discuss it under twelve sub-headings.
Although reference will be made to contradictions between ourselves and
the enemy, this discussion will centre on contradictions among the
people.

I. TWO TYPES OF CONTRADICTIONS DIFFERING IN NATURE

Never before has our country been as united as it is today. The
victories of the bourgeois-democratic revolution and of the socialist
revolution and our achievements in socialist construction have rapidly
changed the face of the old China. A still brighter future lies ahead
for our motherland. The days of national disunity and chaos which the
people detested are gone, never to return. Led by the working class and
the Communist Party, our 600 million people, united as one, are engaged
in the great task of building socialism. The unification of our country,
the unity of our people and the unity of our various nationalities --
these are the basic guarantees for the sure triumph of our cause.
However, this does not mean that contradictions no longer exist in our
society. To imagine that none exist is a naive idea which is at variance
with objective reality. We are confronted with two types of social
contradictions -- those between ourselves and the enemy and those among
the people. The two are totally different in nature.

To understand these two different types of contradictions correctly, we
must first be clear on what is meant by "the people" and what is meant
by "the enemy". The concept of "the people" varies in content in
different countries and in different periods of history in a given
country. Take our own country for example. During the War of Resistance
Against Japan, all those classes, strata and social groups opposing
Japanese aggression came within the category of the people, while the
Japanese imperialists, their Chinese collaborators and the pro-Japanese
elements were all enemies of the people. During the War of Liberation,
the U.S. imperialists and their running dogs -- the
bureaucrat-capitalists, the landlords and the Kuomintang reactionaries
who represented these two classes -- were the enemies of the people,
while the other classes, strata and social groups, which opposed them,
all came within the category of the people. At the present stage, the
period of building socialism, the classes, strata and social groups
which favour, support and work for the cause of socialist construction
all come within the category of the people, while the social forces and
groups which resist the socialist revolution and are hostile to or
sabotage socialist construction are all enemies of the people.

The contradictions between ourselves and the enemy are antagonistic
contradictions. Within the ranks of the people, the contradictions among
the working people are non-antagonistic, while those between the
exploited and the exploiting classes have a non-antagonistic as well as
an antagonistic aspect. There have always been contradictions among the
people, but they are different in content in each period of the
revolution and in the period of building socialism. In the conditions
prevailing in China today, the contradictions among the people comprise
the contradictions within the working class, the contradictions within
the peasantry, the contradictions within the intelligentsia, the
contradictions between the working class and the peasantry, the
contradictions between the workers and peasants on the one hand and the
intellectuals on the other, the contradictions between the working class
and other sections of the working people on the one hand and the
national bourgeoisie on the other, the contradictions within the
national bourgeoisie, and so on. Our People's Government is one that
genuinely represents the people's interests, it is a government that
serves the people. Nevertheless, there are still certain contradictions
between this government and the people. These include the contradictions
between the interests of the state and the interests of the collective
on the one hand and the interests of the individual on the other,
between democracy and centralism, between the leadership and the led,
and the contradictions arising from the bureaucratic style of work of
some of the state personnel in their relations with the masses. All
these are also contradictions among the people. Generally speaking, the
fundamental identity of the people's interests underlies the
contradictions among the people.

In our country, the contradiction between the working class and the
national bourgeoisie comes under the category of contradictions among
the people. By and large, the class struggle between the two is a class
struggle within the ranks of the people, because the Chinese national
bourgeoisie has a dual character. In the period of the
bourgeois-democratic revolution, it had both a revolutionary and a
conciliationist side to its character. In the period of the socialist
revolution, exploitation of the working class for profit constitutes one
side of the character of the national bourgeoisie, while its support of
the Constitution and its willingness to accept socialist transformation
constitute the other. The national bourgeoisie differs from the
imperialists, the landlords and the bureaucrat-capitalists. The
contradiction between the national bourgeoisie and the working class is
one between exploiter and exploited, and is by nature antagonistic. But
in the concrete conditions of China, this antagonistic contradiction
between the two classes, if properly handled, can be transformed into a
non-antagonistic one and be resolved by peaceful methods. However, the
contradiction between the working class and the national bourgeoisie
will change into a contradiction between ourselves and the enemy if we
do not handle it properly and do not follow the policy of uniting with,
criticizing and educating the national bourgeoisie, or if the national
bourgeoisie does not accept this policy of ours.

Since they are different in nature, the contradictions between ourselves
and the enemy and the contradictions among the people must be resolved
by different methods. To put it briefly, the former entail drawing a
clear distinction between ourselves and the enemy, and the latter entail
drawing a clear distinction between right and wrong. It is of course
true that the distinction between ourselves and the enemy is also one of
right and wrong. For example, the question of who is in the right, we or
the domestic and foreign reactionaries, the imperialists, the feudalists
and bureaucrat-capitalists, is also one of right and wrong, but it is in
a different category from questions of right and wrong among the people.

Our state is a people's democratic dictatorship led by the working class
and based on the worker-peasant alliance. What is this dictatorship for?
Its first function is internal, namely, to suppress the reactionary
classes and elements and those exploiters who resist the socialist
revolution, to suppress those who try to wreck our socialist
construction, or in other words, to resolve the contradictions between
ourselves and the internal enemy. For instance, to arrest, try and
sentence certain counter-revolutionaries, and to deprive landlords and
bureaucrat-capitalists of their right to vote and their freedom of
speech for a certain period of time -- all this comes within the scope
of our dictatorship. To maintain public order and safeguard the
interests of the people, it is necessary to exercise dictatorship as
well over thieves, swindlers, murderers, arsonists, criminal gangs and
other scoundrels who seriously disrupt public order. The second function
of this dictatorship is to protect our country from subversion and
possible aggression by external enemies. In such contingencies, it is
the task of this dictatorship to resolve the contradiction between
ourselves and the external enemy. The aim of this dictatorship is to
protect all our people so that they can devote themselves to peaceful
labour and make China a socialist country with modern industry, modern
agriculture, and modern science and culture. Who is to exercise this
dictatorship? Naturally, the working class and the entire people under
its leadership. Dictatorship does not apply within the ranks of the
people. The people cannot exercise dictatorship over themselves, nor
must one section of the people oppress another. Law-breakers among the
people will be punished according to law, but this is different in
principle from the exercise of dictatorship to suppress enemies of the
people. What applies among the people is democratic centralism. Our
Constitution lays it down that citizens of the People's Republic of
China enjoy freedom of speech, the press, assembly, association,
procession, demonstration, religious belief, and so on. Our Constitution
also provides that the organs of state must practice democratic
centralism, that they must rely on the masses and that their personnel
must serve the people. Our socialist democracy is the broadest kind of
democracy, such as is not to be found in any bourgeois state. Our
dictatorship is the people's democratic dictatorship led by the working
class and based on the worker-peasant alliance. That is to say,
democracy operates within the ranks of the people, while the working
class, uniting with all others enjoying civil rights, and in the first
place with the peasantry, enforces dictatorship over the reactionary
classes and elements and all those who resist socialist transformation
and oppose socialist construction. By civil rights, we mean,
politically, the rights of freedom and democracy.

But this freedom is freedom with leadership and this democracy is
democracy under centralized guidance, not anarchy. Anarchy does not
accord with the interests or wishes of the people.

Certain people in our country were delighted by the Hungarian incident.
They hoped that something similar would happen in China, that thousands
upon thousands of people would take to the streets to demonstrate
against the People's Government. Their hopes ran counter to the
interests of the masses and therefore could not possibly win their
support. Deceived by domestic and foreign counter-revolutionaries, a
section of the people in Hungary made the mistake of resorting to
violence against the people's government, with the result that both the
state and the people suffered. The damage done to the country's economy
in a few weeks of rioting will take a long time to repair. In our
country there were some others who wavered _on_ the question of the
Hungarian incident because they were ignorant of the real state of
affairs in the world. They think that there is top little freedom under
our people's democracy and that there is more, freedom under Western
parliamentary democracy. They ask for _a_ two-party system as in the
West, with one party in office and the other in opposition. But this
so-called two-party system is nothing but _a_ device for maintaining the
dictatorship of the bourgeoisie; it can never guarantee freedoms to the
working people. As a matter of fact, freedom and democracy exist not in
the abstract, but only in the concrete. In a society where class
struggle exists, if there is freedom for the exploiting classes to
exploit the working people, there is no freedom for the working people
not to be exploited. If there is democracy for the bourgeoisie, there is
no democracy for the proletariat and other working people. The legal
existence of the Communist Party is tolerated in some capitalist
countries, but only to the extent that it does not endanger the
fundamental interests of the bourgeoisie; it is not tolerated beyond
that. Those who demand freedom and democracy in the abstract regard
democracy as an end and not as a means. Democracy as such sometimes
seems to be an end, but it is in fact only a means. Marxism teaches us
that democracy is part of the superstructure and belongs to the realm of
politics. That is to say, in the last analysis, it serves the economic
base. The same is true of freedom. Both democracy and freedom are
relative, not absolute, and they come into being and develop in specific
historical conditions. Within the ranks of the people, democracy is
correlative with centralism and freedom with discipline. They are the
two opposites of a single entity, contradictory as well as united, and
we should not one-sidedly emphasize one to the exclusion of the other.
Within the ranks of the people, we cannot do without freedom, nor can we
do without discipline; we cannot do without democracy, nor can we do
without centralism. This unity of democracy and centralism, of freedom
and discipline, constitutes our democratic centralism. Under this
system, the people enjoy broad democracy and freedom, but at the same
time they have to keep within the bounds of socialist discipline. All
this is well understood by the masses.

In advocating freedom with leadership and democracy under centralized
guidance, we in no way mean that coercive measures should be taken to
settle ideological questions or questions involving the distinction
between right and wrong among the people. All attempts to use
administrative orders or coercive measures to settle ideological
questions or questions of right and wrong are not only ineffective but
harmful. We cannot abolish religion by administrative order or force
people not to believe in it. We cannot compel people to give up
idealism, any more than we can force them to embrace Marxism. The only
way to settle questions of an ideological nature or controversial issues
among the people is by the democratic method, the method of discussion,
criticism, persuasion and education, and not by the method of coercion
or repression. To be able to carry on their production and studies
effectively and to lead their lives in peace and order, the people want
their government and those in charge of production and of cultural and
educational organizations to issue appropriate administrative
regulations of an obligatory nature. It is common sense that without
them the maintenance of public order would be impossible. Administrative
regulations and the method of persuasion and education complement each
other in resolving contradictions among the people. In fact,
administrative regulations for the maintenance of public order must be
accompanied by persuasion and education, for in many cases regulations
alone will not work.

This democratic method of resolving contradictions among the people was
epitomized in 1942 in the formula "unity -- criticism -- unity". To
elaborate, that means starting from the desire for unity, resolving
contradictions through criticism or struggle, and arriving at a new
unity on a new basis. In our experience this is the correct method of
resolving contradictions among the people. In 1942 we used it to resolve
contradictions inside the Communist Party, namely, the contradictions
between the dogmatists and the great majority of the membership, and
between dogmatism and Marxism. The "Left" dogmatists had resorted to the
method of "ruthless struggle and merciless blows" in inner-Party
struggle. It was the wrong method. In criticizing "Left" dogmatism, we
did not use this old method but adopted a new one, that is, one of
starting from the desire for unity, distinguishing between right and
wrong through criticism or struggle, and arriving at a new unity on a
new basis. This was the method used in the rectification movement of
1942. Within a few years, by the time the Chinese Communist Party held
its Seventh National Congress in 1945, unity was achieved throughout the
Party as anticipated, and consequently the people's revolution
triumphed. Here, the essential thing is to start from the desire for
unity. For without this desire for unity, the struggle, once begun, is
certain to throw things into confusion and get out of hand. Wouldn't
this be the same as "ruthless struggle and merciless blows"? And what
Party unity would there be left? It was precisely this experience that
led us to the formula "unity -- criticism -- unity". Or, in other words,
"learn from past mistakes to avoid future ones and cure the sickness to
save the patient". We extended this method beyond our Party. We applied
it with great success in the anti-Japanese base areas in dealing with
the relations between the leadership and the masses, between the army
and the people, between officers and men, between the different units of
the army, and between the different groups of cadres. The use of this
method can be traced back to still earlier times in our Party's history.
Ever since 1927 when we built our revolutionary armed forces and base
areas in the south, this method had been used to deal with the relations
between the Party and the masses, between the army and the people,
between officers and men, and with other relations among the people. The
only difference was that during the anti-Japanese war we employed this
method much more consciously. And since the liberation of the whole
country, we have employed this same method of "unity -- criticism --
unity" in our relations with the democratic parties and with industrial
and commercial circles. Our task now is to continue to extend and make
still better use of this method throughout the ranks of the people; we
want all our factories, co-operatives, shops, schools, offices and
people's organizations, in a word, all our 600 million people, to use it
in resolving contradictions among themselves.

In ordinary circumstances, contradictions among the people are not
antagonistic. But if they are not handled properly, or if we relax our
vigilance and lower our guard, antagonism may arise. In a socialist
country, a development of this kind is usually only a localized and
temporary phenomenon. The reason is that the system of exploitation of
man by man has been abolished and the interests of the people are
fundamentally identical. The antagonistic actions which took place on a
fairly wide scale during the Hungarian incident were the result of the
operations of both domestic and foreign counter-revolutionary elements.
This was a particular as well as a temporary phenomenon. It was a case
of the reactionaries inside a socialist country, in league with the
imperialists, attempting to achieve their conspiratorial aims by taking
advantage of contradictions among the people to foment dissension and
stir up disorder. The lesson of the Hungarian incident merits attention.

Many people seem to think that the use of the democratic method to
resolve contradictions among the people is something new. Actually it is
not. Marxists have always held that the cause of the proletariat must
depend on the masses of the people and that Communists must use the
democratic method of persuasion and education when working among the
labouring people and must on no account resort to commandism or
coercion. The Chinese Communist Party faithfully adheres to this
Marxist-Leninist principle. It has been our consistent view that under
the people's democratic dictatorship two different methods, one
dictatorial and the other democratic, should be used to resolve the two
types of contradictions which differ in nature -- those between
ourselves and the enemy and those among the people. This idea has been
explained again and again in many Party documents and in speeches by
many leading comrades of our Party. In my article "On the People's
Democratic Dictatorship", written in 1949, I said, "The combination of
these two aspects, democracy for the people and dictatorship over the
reactionaries, is the people's democratic dictatorship." I also pointed
out that in order to settle problems within the ranks of the people "the
method we employ is democratic, the method of persuasion, not of
compulsion". Again, in addressing the Second Session of the First
National Committee of the Political Consultative Conference in June two,
I said:

The people's democratic dictatorship uses two methods. Towards the
enemy, it uses the method of dictatorship, that is, for as long a period
of time as is necessary it does not permit them to take part in
political activity and compels them to obey the law of the People's
Government, to engage in labour and, through such labour, be transformed
into new men. Towards the people; on the contrary, it uses the method of
democracy and not of compulsion, that is, it must necessarily let them
take part in political activity and does not compel them to do this or
that but uses the method of democracy to educate and persuade. Such
education is self-education for the people, and its basic method is
criticism and self-criticism.

Thus, on many occasions we have discussed the use of the democratic
method for resolving contradictions among the people; furthermore, we
have in the main applied it in our work, and many cadres and many other
people are familiar with it in practice. Why then do some people now
feel that it is a new issue? Because, in the past, the struggle between
ourselves and the enemy, both internal and external, was most acute, and
contradictions among the people therefore did not attract as much
attention as they do today.

Quite a few people fail to make a clear distinction between these two
different types of contradictions--those between ourselves and the enemy
and those among the people -- and are prone to confuse: the two. It must
be admitted that it is sometimes quite easy to do so. We have had
instances of such confusion in our work in the past; In the course of
cleaning out counter-revolutionaries good people were sometimes mistaken
for bad, and such things still happen today. We are able to keep
mistakes within bounds because it has been our policy to draw a sharp
line between ourselves and the enemy and to rectify mistakes whenever
discovered.

Marxist philosophy holds that the law of the unity of opposites is the
fundamental law of the universe. This law operates universally, whether
in the natural world, in human society, or in man's thinking. Between
the opposites in a contradiction there is at once unity and struggle,
and it is this that impels things to move and change. Contradictions
exist everywhere, but their nature differs in accordance with the
different nature of different things. In any given thing, the unity of
opposites is conditional, temporary and transitory, and hence relative,
whereas the struggle of opposites is absolute. Lenin gave a very clear
exposition of this law. It has come to be understood by a growing number
of people in our country. But for many people it is one thing to accept
this law and quite another to apply it in examining and dealing with
problems. Many dare not openly admit that contradictions still exist
among the people of our country, while it is precisely these
contradictions that are pushing our society forward. Many do not admit
that contradictions still exist in socialist society, with the result
that they become irresolute and passive when confronted with social
contradictions; they do not understand that socialist society grows more
united and consolidated through the ceaseless process of correctly
handling and resolving contradictions. For this reason, we need to
explain things to our people, and to our cadres in the first place, in
order to help them understand the contradictions in socialist society
and learn to use correct methods for handling them.

Contradictions in socialist society are fundamentally different from
those in the old societies, such as capitalist society. In capitalist
society contradictions find expression in acute antagonisms and
conflicts, in sharp class struggle; they cannot be resolved by the
capitalist system itself and can only be resolved by socialist
revolution. The case is quite different with contradictions in socialist
society; on the contrary, they are not antagonistic and can be
ceaselessly resolved by the socialist system itself.

In socialist society the basic contradictions are still those between
the relations of production and the productive forces and between the
superstructure and the economic base. However, they are fundamentally
different in character and have different features from the
contradictions between the relations of production and the productive
forces and between the superstructure and the economic base in the old
societies. The present social system of our country is far superior to
that of the old days. If it were not so, the old system would not have
been overthrown and the new system could not have been established. In
saying that the socialist relations of production correspond better to
the character of the productive forces than did the old relations of
production, we mean that they allow the productive forces to develop at
a speed unattainable in the old society, so that production can expand
steadily and increasingly meet the constantly growing needs of the
people. Under the rule of imperialism, feudalism and
bureaucrat-capitalism, the productive forces of the old China grew very
slowly. For more than fifty years before liberation, China produced only
a few tens of thousands of tons of steel a year, not counting the output
of the northeastern provinces. If these provinces are included, the peak
annual steel output only amounted to a little over 900,000 tons. In
1949, the national steel output was a little over 100,000 tons. Yet now,
a mere seven years after the liberation of our country, steel output
already exceeds 4,000,000 tons. In the old China, there was hardly any
machine-building industry, to say nothing of the automobile and aircraft
industries; now we have all three. When the people overthrew the rule of
imperialism, feudalism and bureaucrat-capitalism, many were not clear as
to which way China should head -- towards capitalism or towards
socialism. Facts have now provided the answer: Only socialism can save
China. The socialist system has promoted the rapid development of the
productive forces of our country, a fact even our enemies abroad have
had to acknowledge.

But our socialist system has only just been set up; it is not yet fully
established or fully consolidated. In joint state-private industrial and
commercial enterprises, capitalists still get a fixed rate of interest
on their capital, that is to say, exploitation still exists. So far as
ownership is concerned, these enterprises are not yet completely
socialist in nature. A number of our agricultural and handicraft
producers' co-operatives are still semi-socialist, while even in the
fully socialist co-operatives certain specific problems of ownership
remain to be solved. Relations between production and exchange in
accordance with socialist principles are being gradually established
within and between all branches of our economy, and more and more
appropriate forms are being sought. The problem of the proper relation
of accumulation to consumption within each of the two sectors of the
socialist economy -- the one where the means of production are owned by
the whole people and the other where the means of production are. owned
by the collective -- and the problem of the proper relation of
accumulation to consumption between the two sectors themselves are
complicated problems for which it is not easy to work out a perfectly
rational solution all at once. To sum up, socialist relations of
production have been established and are in correspondence with the
growth of the productive forces, but these relations are still far from
perfect, and this imperfection stands in contradiction to the growth of
the productive forces. Apart from correspondence as well as
contradiction between the relations of production and the growth: of the
productive forces, there is correspondence as well as contradiction
between the superstructure and the economic base. The superstructure,
comprising the state system and laws of the people's democratic
dictatorship and the socialist ideology guided by Marxism-Leninism,
plays a positive role in facilitating the victory of socialist
transformation and the socialist way of organizing labour; it is in
correspondence with the socialist economic base, that is, with socialist
relations of production. But the existence of bourgeois ideology, a
certain bureaucratic style of work in our state organs and defects in
some of the links in our state institutions are in contradiction with
the socialist economic base. We must continue to resolve all such
contradictions in the light of our specific conditions. Of course, new
problems will emerge as these contradictions are resolved. And further
efforts will be required to resolve the new contradictions. For
instance, a constant process of readjustment through state planning is
needed to deal with the contradiction between production and the needs
of society, which will long remain an objective reality. Every year our
country draws up an economic plan in order to establish a proper ratio
between accumulation and consumption and achieve an equilibrium between
production and needs. Equilibrium is nothing but a temporary, relative,
unity of opposites. By the end of each year, this equilibrium, taken as
a whole, is upset by the struggle of opposites; the unity undergoes a
change, equilibrium becomes disequilibrium, unity becomes disunity, and
once again it is necessary to work out an equilibrium and unity for the
next year. Herein lies the superiority of our planned economy. As a
matter of fact, this equilibrium, this unity, is partially upset every
month or every quarter, and partial readjustments are called for.
Sometimes, contradictions arise and the equilibrium is upset because our
subjective arrangements do not conform to objective reality; this is
what we call making a mistake. The ceaseless emergence and ceaseless
resolution of contradictions constitute the dialectical law of the
development of things.

Today, matters stand as follows. The large-scale, turbulent class
struggles of the masses characteristic of times of revolution have in
the main come to an end, but class struggle is by no means entirely
over. While welcoming the new system, the masses are not yet quite
accustomed to it. Government personnel are not sufficiently experienced
and have to undertake further study and investigation of specific
policies. In other words, time is needed for our socialist system to
become established and consolidated, for the masses to become accustomed
to the new system, and for government personnel to learn and acquire
experience. It is therefore imperative for us at this juncture to raise
the question of distinguishing contradictions among the people from
those between ourselves and the enemy, as well as the question of the
correct handling of contradictions among the people, in order to unite
the people of all nationalities in our country for the new battle, the
battle against nature, develop our economy and culture, help the whole
nation to traverse this period of transition relatively smoothly,
consolidate our new system and build up our new state.

II. THE QUESTION OF ELIMINATING COUNTER-REVOLUTIONARIES

The elimination of counter-revolutionaries is a struggle of opposites as
between ourselves and the enemy. Among the people, there are some who
see this question in a somewhat different light. Two kinds of people
hold views differing from ours. Those with a Right deviation in their
thinking make no distinction between ourselves and the enemy and take
the enemy for our own people. They regard as friends the very persons
whom the masses regard as enemies. Those with a "Left" deviation in
their thinking magnify contradictions between ourselves and the enemy to
such an extent that they take certain contradictions among the people
for contradictions with the enemy and regard as counter-revolutionaries
persons who are actually not. Both these views are wrong. Neither makes
possible the correctly handling of the problem of eliminating
counter-revolutionaries or a correct assessment of this work.

To form a correct evaluation of our work in eliminating
counter-revolutionaries, let us see what repercussions the Hungarian
incident has had in China. After its occurrence there was some unrest
among a section of our intellectuals, but there were no squalls. Why?
One reason, it must be said, was our success in eliminating
counter-revolutionaries fairly thoroughly.

Of course, the consolidation of our state is not due primarily to the
elimination of counter-revolutionaries. It is due primarily to the fact
that we have a Communist Party and a Liberation Army both tempered in
decades of revolutionary struggle, and a working people likewise so
tempered. Our Party and our armed forces are rooted in the masses, have
been tempered in the flames of a protracted revolution and have the
capacity to fight. Our People's Republic was not built overnight, but
developed step by step out of the revolutionary base areas. A number of
democratic personages have also been tempered in the struggle in varying
degrees, and they have gone through troubled times together with us.
Some intellectuals were tempered in the struggles against imperialism
and reaction; since liberation many have gone through a process of
ideological remoulding aimed at enabling them to distinguish clearly
between ourselves and the enemy. In addition, the consolidation of our
state is due to the fact that our economic measures are basically sound,
that the people's life is secure and steadily improving, that our
policies towards the national bourgeoisie and other classes are correct,
and so on. Nevertheless, our success in eliminating
counter-revolutionaries is undoubtedly an important reason for the
consolidation of our state. For all these reasons, with few exceptions
our college students are patriotic and support socialism and did not
give way to unrest during the Hungarian incident, even though many of
them come from families of non-working people. The same was true of the
national bourgeoisie, to say nothing of the basic masses -- the workers
and peasants.

After liberation, we rooted out a number of counter-revolutionaries.
Some were sentenced to death for major crimes. This was absolutely
necessary, it was the demand of the masses, and it was done to free them
from long years of oppression by the counter-revolutionaries and all
kinds of local tyrants, in other words, to liberate the productive
forces. If we had not done so, the masses would not have been able to
lift their heads. Since 1956, however, there has been a radical change
in the situation. In the country as a whole, the bulk of the
counter-revolutionaries have been cleared out. Our basic task has
changed from unfettering the productive forces to protecting and
expanding them in the context of the new relations of production.
Because of failure to understand that our present policy fits the
present situation and our past policy fitted the past situation, some
people want to make use of the present policy to reverse past decisions
and to negate the tremendous success we achieved in eliminating
counter-revolutionaries. This is completely wrong, and the masses will
not permit it.

In our work of eliminating counter-revolutionaries successes were the
main thing, but there were also mistakes. In some cases there were
excesses and in others counter-revolutionaries slipped through our net.
Our policy is: "Counter-revolutionaries must be eliminated wherever
found, mistakes must be corrected whenever discovered." Our line in the
work of eliminating counter-revolutionaries is the mass line. Of course,
even with the mass line mistakes may still occur, but they will be fewer
and easier to correct. The masses gain experience through struggle. From
the things done correctly they gain the experience of how things are
done correctly. From the mistakes made they gain the experience of how
mistakes are made.

Wherever mistakes have been discovered in the work of eliminating
counter-revolutionaries, steps have been or are being taken to correct
them. Those not yet discovered will be corrected as soon as they come to
light. Exoneration or rehabilitation should be made known as widely as
were the original wrong decisions. I propose that a comprehensive review
of the work of eliminating counter-revolutionaries be made this year or
next to sum up experience, promote justice and counter unjust attacks.
Nationally, this review should be in the charge of the Standing
Committees of the National People's Congress and of the National
Committee of the Political Consultative Conference and, locally, in the
charge of the people's councils and the committees of the Political
Consultative Conference in the provinces and municipalities. In this
review, we must help the large numbers of cadres and activists involved
in the work, and not pour cold water on them. It would not be right to
dampen their spirits. Nonetheless, wrongs must be righted when
discovered. This must be the attitude of all the public security organs,
the procurators' offices and the judicial departments, prisons and
agencies charged with the reform of criminals through labour. We hope
that wherever possible members of the Standing Committee of the National
People's Congress, members of the National Committee of the Political
Consultative Conference and people's deputies will take part in this
review. This will be of help in perfecting our legal system and in
dealing correctly with counter-revolutionaries and other criminals.

The present situation with regard to counter-revolutionaries can be
described in these words: There still are counter-revolutionaries, but
not many. In the first place, there still are counter-revolutionaries.
Some people say that there aren't any more left and all is well and that
we can therefore lay our heads on our pillows and just drop off to
sleep. But this is not the way things are. The fact is, there still are
counter-revolutionaries (of course, that is not to say you'll find them
everywhere and in every organization), and we must continue to fight
them. It must be understood that the hidden counter-revolutionaries
still at large will not take things lying down, but will certainly seize
even opportunity to make trouble. The U.S. imperialists and the Chiang
Kai-shek clique are constantly sending in secret agents to carry on
disruptive activities. Even after all the existing
counter-revolutionaries have been combed out, new ones are likely to
emerge. If we drop our guard, we shall be badly fooled and shall suffer
severely. Counter-revolutionaries must be rooted out with a firm hand
wherever they are found making trouble. But, taking the country as a
whole, there are certainly not many counter-revolutionaries. It would be
wrong to say that there are still large numbers of
counter-revolutionaries in China Acceptance of that view would likewise
result in a mess.

III. THE QUESTION OF THE CO-OPERATIVE TRANSFORMATION OF AGRICULTURE

We have a rural population of over 500 million, so how our peasants fare
has a most important bearing on the development of our economy and the
consolidation of our state power. In my view, the situation is basically
sound. The co-operative transformation of agriculture has been
successfully accomplished, and this has resolved the great contradiction
in our country between socialist industrialization and the individual
peasant economy. As the co-operative transformation of agriculture was
completed so rapidly, some people were worried and wondered whether
something untoward might occur. There are indeed some faults, but
fortunately they are not serious and on the whole the movement is
healthy. The peasants are working with a will, and last year there was
an increase in the country's grain output despite the worst floods,
droughts and gales in years. Now there are people who are stirring up a
miniature typhoon, they are saying that co-operation is no good, that
there is nothing superior about it. Is co-operation superior or not?
Among the documents distributed at today's meeting there is one about
the Wang Kuo-fan Co-operative in Tsunhua County, Hopei Province, which I
suggest you read. This co-operative is situated in a hilly region which
was very poor in the past and which for a number of years depended on
relief grain from the People's Government. When the co-operative was
first set up in 1953, people called it the "paupers' co-op". But it has
become better off year by year, and now, after four years of hard
struggle, most of its households have reserves of grain. What was
possible for this co-operative should also be possible for others to
achieve under normal conditions in the same length of time or a little
longer. Clearly there are no grounds for saying that something has gone
wrong with agricultural co-operation.

It is also clear that it takes hard struggle to build co-operatives. New
things always have to experience difficulties and setbacks as they grow.
It is sheer fantasy to imagine that the cause of socialism is al I plain
sailing and easy success, with no difficulties and setbacks, or without
the exertion of tremendous efforts.

Who are the active supporters of the co-operatives? The overwhelming
majority of the poor and lower-middle peasants who constitute more than
70 per cent of the rural population. Most of the other peasants are also
placing their hopes on the co-operatives. Only a very small minority are
really dissatisfied. Quite a number of persons have failed to analyse
this situation and to make an over-all examination of the achievements
and shortcomings of the co-operatives and the causes of these
shortcomings; instead they have taken part of the picture or one side of
the matter for the whole, and consequently a miniature typhoon has been
stirred up among some people, who are saying that the co-operatives are
not superior.

How long will it take to consolidate the co-operatives and for this talk
about their not being superior to wind up? Judging from the experience
of the growth of many co-operatives, it will probably take five years or
a little longer. As most of our co-operatives are only a little over a
year old, it would be unreasonable to ask too much of them. In my view,
we will be doing well enough if the co-operatives can be consolidated
during the Second Five-Year Plan after being established in the First.

The co-operatives are now in the process of gradual consolidation. There
are certain contradictions that remain to be resolved, such as those
between the state and the co-operatives and those in and between the
co-operatives themselves.

To resolve these contradictions we must pay constant attention to the
problems of production and distribution. On the question of production,
the co-operative economy must be subject to the unified economic
planning of the state, while retaining a certain flexibility and
independence that do not run counter to the state's unified plan or its
policies, laws and regulations. At the same time, every household id a
co-operative must comply with the over-all plan of the co-operative or
production team to which it belongs, though it may make its own
appropriate plans in regard to land allotted for personal needs and to
other individually operated economic undertakings. On the question of
distribution, we must take the interests of the state, the collective
and the individual into account. We must properly handle the three-way
relationship between the state agricultural tax, the co-operative's
accumulation fund and the peasants' personal income, and take constant
care to make readjustments so as to resolve contradictions between them.
Accumulation is essential for both the state and the co-operative, but
in neither case should it be excessive. We should do everything possible
to enable the peasants in normal years to raise their personal incomes
annually through increased production.

Many people say that the peasants lead a hard life. Is this true? In one
sense it is. That is to say, because the imperialists and their agents
oppressed and exploited us for over a century, ours is an impoverished
country and the standard of living not only of our peasants but of our
workers and intellectuals is still low. We will need several decades of
strenuous effort gradually to raise the standard of living of our people
as a whole. In this context, it is right to say that the peasants lead a
"hard life". But in another sense it is not true. We refer to the
allegation that in the seven years since liberation it is only the life
of the workers that has been improved and not that of the peasants. As a
matter of fact, with very few exceptions, there has been some
improvement in the life of both the peasants and the workers. Since
liberation, the peasants have been free from landlord exploitation and
their production has increased annually. Take grain crops. In 1949, the
country's output was only something over 210,000 million catties. By
1956, it had risen to more than 360,000 million catties, an increase of
nearly 150,000 million catties. The state agricultural tax is not heavy,
only amounting to something over 30,000 million catties a year. State
purchases of grain from the peasants at standard prices only amount to a
little over 50,000 million catties a year. These two items together
total over 80,000 million catties. Furthermore, more than half this
grain is sold back to the villages and nearby towns. Obviously, no one
can say that there has been no improvement in the life of the peasants.
In order to help agriculture to develop and the co-operatives to become
consolidated, we are planning to stabilize the total annual amount of
the grain tax plus the grain purchased by the state at somewhat more
than 80,000 million catties within a few years. In this way, the small
number of grain-deficient households still found in the countryside will
stop being short, all peasant households, except some raising industrial
crops, will either have grain reserves or at least become
self-sufficient, there will no longer be poor peasants in the
countryside, and the standard of living of the entire peasantry will
reach or surpass the middle peasants' level. It is not right simply to
compare a peasant's average annual income with a worker's and jump to
the conclusion that one is too low and the other too high. Since the
labour productivity of the workers is much higher than that of the
peasants and the latter's cost of living is much lower than that of
workers in the cities, the workers cannot be said to have received
special favours from the state. The wages of a small number of workers
and some state personnel are in fact a little too high, the peasants
have reason to be dissatisfied with this, and it is necessary to make
certain appropriate adjustments according to specific circumstances.

IV. THE QUESTION OF THE INDUSTRIALISTS AND BUSINESSMEN

With regard to the transformation of our social system, the year 1956
saw the conversion of privately owned industrial and commercial
enterprises into joint state-private enterprises as well as the
co-operative transformation of agriculture and handicrafts. The speed
and smoothness of this conversion were closely bound up with our
treating the contradiction between the working class and the national
bourgeoisie as a contradiction among the people. Has this class
contradiction been completely resolved? No, not yet. That will take a
considerable period of time. However, some people say the capitalists
have been so remoulded that they are now not very different from the
workers and that further remoulding is unnecessary. Others go so far as
to say that the capitalists are even better than the workers. Still
others ask, if remoulding is necessary, why isn't it necessary for the
working class? Are these opinions correct? Of course not.

In the building of a socialist society, everybody needs remoulding --
the exploiters and also the working people. Who says it isn't necessary
for the working class? Of course, the remoulding of the exploiters is
essentially different from that of the working people, and the two must
not be confused. The working class remoulds the whole of society in
class struggle and in the struggle against nature, and in the process it
remoulds itself. It must ceaselessly learn in the course of work,
gradually overcome its shortcomings and never stop doing so. Take for
example those of us present here. Many of us make some progress each
year, that is to say, we are remoulding ourselves each year. For myself,
I used to have all sorts of non-Marxist ideas, and it was only later
that I embraced Marxism. I learned a little Marxism from books and took
the first steps in remoulding my ideology, but it was mainly through
taking part in class struggle over the years that I came to be
remoulded. And if I am to make further progress, I must continue to
learn, otherwise I shall lag behind. Can the capitalists be so good that
they need no more remoulding?

Some people contend that the Chinese bourgeoisie no longer has two sides
to its character, but only one side. Is this true? No. While members of
the bourgeoisie have become administrative personnel in joint
state-private enterprises and are being transformed from exploiters into
working people living by their own labour, they still get a fixed rate
of interest on their capital in the joint enterprises, that is, they
have not yet cut themselves loose from the roots of exploitation.
Between them and the working class there is still a considerable gap in
ideology, sentiments and habits of life. How can it be said that they no
longer have two sides to their character? Even when they stop receiving
their fixed interest payments and the "bourgeois" label is removed, they
will still need ideological remoulding for quite some time. If, as is
alleged, the bourgeoisie no longer has a dual character, then the
capitalists will no longer have the task of studying and of remoulding
themselves.

It must be said that this view does not tally either with the actual
situation of our industrialists and businessmen or with what most of
them want. During the past few years, most of them have been willing to
study and have made marked progress. As their thorough remoulding can be
achieved only in the course of work, they should engage in labour
together with the staff and workers in the enterprises and regard these
enterprises as the chief places in which to remould themselves. But it
is also important for them to change some of their old views through
study. Such study should be on a voluntary basis. When they return to
the enterprises after being in study groups for some weeks, many
industrialists and businessmen find that they have more of a common
language with the workers and the representatives of state ownership,
and so there are better possibilities for working together. They know
from personal experience that it is good for them to keep on studying
and remoulding themselves. The idea mentioned above that study and
remoulding are not necessary reflects the views not of the majority of
industrialists and businessmen but of only a small number.

V. THE QUESTION OF THE INTELLECTUALS

The contradictions within the ranks of the people in our country also
find expression among the intellectuals. The several million
intellectuals who worked for the old society have come to serve the new
society, and the question that now arises is how they can fit in with
the needs of the new society and how we can help them to do so. This,
too, is a contradiction among the people.

Most of our intellectuals have made marked progress during the last
seven years. They have shown they are in favour of the socialist system.
Many are diligently studying Marxism, and some have become communists.
The latter, though at present small in number, are steadily increasing.
Of course, there are still some intellectuals who are sceptical about
socialism or do not approve of it, but they are a minority.

China needs the services of as many intellectuals as possible for the
colossal task of building socialism. We should trust those who are
really willing to serve the cause of socialism and should radically
improve our relations with them and help them solve the problems
requiring solution, so that they can give full play to their talents.
Many of our comrades are not good at uniting with intellectuals. They
are stiff in their attitude towards them, lack respect for their work
and interfere in certain scientific and cultural matters where
interference is unwarranted. We must do away with all such shortcomings.

Although large numbers of intellectuals have made progress, they should
not be complacent. They must continue to remould themselves, gradually
shed their bourgeois world outlook and acquire the proletarian,
communist world outlook so that they can fully fit in with the needs of
the new society and unite with the workers and peasants. The change in
world outlook is fundamental, and up to now most of our intellectuals
cannot be said to have accomplished it. We hope that they will continue
to make progress and that in the course of work and study they will
gradually acquire the communist world outlook, grasp Marxism-Leninism
and become integrated with the workers and peasants. We hope they will
not stop halfway, or, what is worse, slide back, for there will be no
future for them in going backwards. Since our country's social system
has changed and the economic base of bourgeois ideology has in the main
been destroyed, not only is it imperative for large numbers of our
intellectuals to change their world outlook, but it is also possible for
them to do so. But a thorough change in world outlook takes a very long
time, and we should spare no pains in helping them and must not be
impatient. Actually, there are bound to be some who ideologically will
always be reluctant to accept Marxism-Leninism and communism. We should
not be too exacting in what we demand of them; as long as they comply
with the requirements laid down by the state and engage in legitimate
pursuits, we should let them have opportunities for suitable work.

Among students and intellectuals there has recently been a falling off
in ideological and political work, and some unhealthy tendencies have
appeared. Some people seem to think that there is no longer any need to
concern themselves with politics or with the future of the motherland
and the ideals of mankind. It seems as if Marxism, once all the rage, is
currently not so much in fashion. To counter these tendencies, we must
strengthen our ideological and political work. Both students and
intellectuals should study hard. In addition to the study of their
specialized subjects, they must make progress ideologically and
politically, which means they should study Marxism, current events and
politics. Not to have a correct political orientation is like not having
a soul. The ideological remoulding in the past was necessary and has
yielded positive results. But it was carried on in a somewhat
rough-and-ready fashion and the feelings of some people were hurt --
this was not good. We must avoid such shortcomings in future. All
departments and organizations should shoulder their responsibilities for
ideological and political work. This applies to the Communist Party, the
Youth League, government departments in charge of this work, and
especially to heads of educational institutions and teachers. Our
educational policy must enable everyone who receives an education to
develop morally, intellectually and physically and become a worker with
both socialist consciousness and culture. We must spread the idea of
building our country through diligence and thrift. We must help all our
young people to understand that ours is still a very poor country, that
we cannot change this situation radically in a short time, and that only
through decades of united effort by our younger generation and all our
people, working with their own hands, can China be made prosperous and
strong. The establishment of our socialist system has opened the road
leading to the ideal society of the future, but to translate this ideal
into reality needs hard work. Some of our young people think that
everything ought to be perfect once a socialist society is established
and that they should be able to enjoy a happy life ready-made, without
working for it. This is unrealistic.

VI. THE QUESTION OF THE MINORITY NATIONALITIES

The minority nationalities in our country number more than thirty
million. Although they constitute only 6 per cent of the total
population, they inhabit extensive regions which comprise 50 to 60 per
cent of China's total area. It is thus imperative to foster good
relation between the Han people and the minority nationalities. The key
to this question lies in overcoming Han chauvinism. At the same time,
efforts should also be made to overcome local-nationality chauvinism,
wherever it exists among the minority nationalities. Both Hanchauvinism
and local-nationality chauvinism are harmful to the unity of the
nationalities; they represent one kind of contradiction among the people
which should be resolved. We have already done some work to this end. In
most of the areas inhabited by minority nationalities there has been
considerable improvement in the relations between the nationalities, but
a number of problems remain to be solved. In some areas, both Han
chauvinism and local-nationality chauvinism still exit to a serious
degree, and this demands full attention. As a result of the efforts of
the people of all nationalities over the last few year democratic
reforms and socialist transformation have in the main been completed in
most of the minority nationality areas. Democrat reforms have not yet
been carried out in Tibet because conditions are not ripe. According to
the seventeen-article agreement reached between the Central People's
Government and the local government of Tibet the reform of the social
system must be carried out, but the timing can only be decided when the
great majority of the people of Tibet and the local leading public
figures consider it opportune, and one should not be impatient. It has
now been decided not to proceed with democratic reforms in Tibet during
the period of the Second Five-Year Plan. Whether to proceed with them in
the period of the Third Five-Year Plan can only be decided in the light
of the situation at the time.

VII. OVER-ALL CONSIDERATION AND PROPER ARRANGEMENT

By over-all consideration we mean consideration that embraces the 600
million people of our country. In drawing up plans, handling affairs or
thinking over problems, we must proceed from the fact that China has a
population of 600 million, and we must never forget this fact. Why do we
make a point of this? Is it possible that there are people who are still
unaware that we have a population of 600 million? Of course, everyone
knows this, but when it comes to actual practice, some people forget all
about it and act as though the fewer the people, the smaller the circle,
the better. Those who have this "small circle" mentality abhor the idea
of bringing every positive factor into play, of uniting with everyone
who can be united with, and of doing everything possible to turn
negative factors into positive ones so as to serve the great cause of
building a socialist society. I hope these people will take a wider view
and fully recognize that we have a population of 600 million, that this
is an objective fact, and that it is an asset for us. Our large
population is a good thing, but of course it also involves certain
difficulties. Construction is going ahead vigorously on all fronts and
very successfully too, but in the present transition period of
tremendous social change there are still many difficult problems.
Progress and at the same time difficulties -- this is a contradiction.
However, not only should all such contradictions be resolved, but they
definitely can be. Our guiding principle is over-all consideration and
proper arrangement. Whatever the problem -- whether it concerns food,
natural calamities, employment, education, the intellectuals, the united
front of all patriotic forces, the minority nationalities, or anything
else -- we must always proceed from the standpoint of over-all
consideration, which embraces the whole people, and must make the proper
arrangement, after consultation with all the circles concerned, in the
light of what is feasible at a particular time and place. On no account
should we complain that there are too many people, that others are
backward, that things are troublesome and hard to handle, and close the
door on them. Do I mean to say that the government alone must take care
of everyone and everything? Of course not. In many cases, they can be
left to the direct care of the public organizations or the masses --
both are quite capable of devising many good ways of handling them. This
also comes within the scope of the principle of over-all consideration
and pro' arrangement. We should give guidance on this to the public
organizations and the people everywhere.

VIII. ON "LET A HUNDRED FLOWERS BLOSSOM LET A HUNDRED SCHOOLS OF THOUGHT
CONTEND" AND "LONG-TERM COEXISTENCE AND MUTUAL SUPERVISION"

"Let a hundred flowers blossom, let a hundred schools of thought
contend" and "long-term coexistence and mutual supervision"--how did
these slogans come to be put forward? They were put forward in the light
of China's specific conditions, in recognition of the continued
existence of various kinds of contradictions in socialist society and in
response to the country's urgent need to speed up its economic and
cultural development. Letting a hundred flowers blossom and a hundred
schools of thought contend is the policy for promoting progress in the
arts and sciences and a flourishing socialist culture in our land.
Different forms and styles in art should develop freely and different
schools in science should contend freely. We think that it is harmful to
the growth of art and science if administrative measures are used to
impose one particular style of art or school of thought and to ban
another. Questions of right and wrong in the arts and science should be
settled through free discussion in artistic and scientific circles and
through practical work in these fields. They should not be settled in an
over-simple manner. A period of trial is often needed to determine
whether something is right or wrong. Throughout history at the outset
new and correct things often failed to win recognition from the majority
of people and had to develop by twists and turns through struggle.
Often, correct and good things were first regarded not as fragrant
flowers but as poisonous weeds. Copernicus' theory of the solar system
and Darwin's theory of evolution were once dismissed as erroneous and
had to win out over bitter opposition. Chinese history offers many
similar examples. In a socialist society, the conditions for the growth
of the new are radically different from and far superior to those in the
old society. Nevertheless, it often happens that new, rising forces are
held back and sound ideas stifled. Besides even in the absence of their
deliberate suppression, the growth of new things may be hindered simply
through lack of discernment. It is therefore necessary to be careful
about questions of right and wrong in the arts and sciences, to
encourage free discussion and avoid hasty conclusions We believe that
such an attitude will help ensure a relatively smooth development of the
arts and sciences.

Marxism, too, has developed through struggle. At the beginning, Marxism
was subjected to all kinds of attack and regarded as a poisonous weed.
This is still the case in many parts of the world. In the socialist
countries, it enjoys a different position. But non-Marxist and, what is
more, anti-Marxist ideologies exist even in these countries. In China,
although socialist transformation has in the main been completed as
regards the system of ownership, and although the large-scale, turbulent
class struggles of the masses characteristic of times of revolution have
in the main come to an end, there are still remnants of the overthrown
landlord and comprador classes, there is still a bourgeoisie, and the
remoulding of the petty bourgeoisie has only just started. Class
struggle is by no means over. The class struggle between the proletariat
and the bourgeoisie, the class struggle between the various political
forces, and the class struggle between the proletariat and the
bourgeoisie in the ideological field will still be protracted and
tortuous and at times even very sharp. The proletariat seeks to
transform the world according to its own world outlook, and so does the
bourgeoisie. In this respect, the question of which will win out,
socialism or capitalism, is not really settled yet. Marxists remain a
minority among the entire population as well as among the intellectuals.
Therefore, Marxism must continue to develop through struggle. Marxism
can develop only through struggle, and this is not only true of the past
and the present, it is necessarily true of the future as well. What is
correct invariably develops in the course of struggle with what is
wrong. The true, the good and the beautiful always exist by contrast
with the false, the evil and the ugly, and grow in struggle with them.
As soon as something erroneous is rejected and a particular truth
accepted by mankind, new truths begin to struggle with new errors. Such
struggles will never end. This is the law of development of truth and,
naturally, of Marxism.

It will take a fairly long period of time to decide the issue in the
ideological struggle between socialism and capitalism in our country.
The reason is that the influence of the bourgeoisie and of the
intellectuals who come from the old society, the very influence which
constitutes their class ideology, will persist in our country for a long
time. If this is not understood at all or is insufficiently understood,
the gravest of mistakes will be made and the necessity of waging
struggle in the ideological field will be ignored. Ideological struggle
differs from other forms of struggle, since the only method used is
painstaking reasoning, and not crude coercion. Today, socialism is in an
advantageous position in the ideological struggle. The basic power of
the state is in the hands of the working people led by the proletariat.
The Communist Party is strong and its prestige high. Although there are
defects and mistakes in our work, every fair-minded person can see that
we are loyal to the people, that we are both determined and able to
build up our motherland together with them, and that we have already
achieved great successes and will achieve still greater ones. The vast
majority of the bourgeoisie and the intellectuals who come from the old
society are patriotic and are willing to serve their flourishing
socialist motherland; they know they will have nothing to fall back on
and their future cannot possibly be bright if they turn away from the
socialist cause and from the working people led by the Communist Party.

People may ask, since Marxism is accepted as the guiding ideology by the
majority of the people in our country, can it be criticized? Certainly
it can. Marxism is scientific truth and fears no criticism. If it did,
and if it could be overthrown by criticism, it would be worthless. In
fact, aren't the idealists criticizing Marxism every day and in every
way? And those who harbour bourgeois and petty-bourgeois ideas and do
not wish to change -- aren't they also criticizing Marxism in every way?
Marxists should not be afraid of criticism from any quarter. Quite the
contrary, they need to temper and develop themselves and win new
positions in the teeth of criticism and in the storm and stress of
struggle. Fighting against wrong ideas is like being vaccinated -- a man
develops greater immunity from disease as a result of vaccination.
Plants raised in hothouses are unlikely to be hardy. Carrying out the
policy of letting a hundred flowers blossom and a hundred schools of
thought contend will not weaken, but strengthen, the leading position of
Marxism in the ideological field.

What should our policy be towards non-Marxist ideas? As far as
unmistakable counter-revolutionaries and saboteurs of the socialist
cause are concerned, the matter is easy, we simply deprive them of their
freedom of speech. But incorrect ideas among the people are quite a
different matter. Will it do to ban such ideas and deny them any
opportunity for expression? Certainly not. It is not only futile but
very harmful to use crude methods in dealing with ideological questions
among the people, with questions about man's mental world. You may ban
the expression of wrong ideas, but the ideas will still be there. On the
other hand, if correct ideas are pampered in hothouses and never exposed
to the elements and immunized against disease, they will not win out
against erroneous ones. Therefore, it is only by employing the method of
discussion, criticism and reasoning that we can really foster correct
ideas and overcome wrong ones, and that we can really settle issues.

It is inevitable that the bourgeoisie and petty bourgeoisie will give
expression to their own ideologies. It is inevitable that they will
stubbornly assert themselves on political and ideological questions by
every possible means. You cannot expect them to do otherwise. We should
not use the method of suppression and prevent them from expressing
themselves, but should allow them to do so and at the same time argue
with them and direct appropriate criticism at them. Undoubtedly, we must
criticize wrong ideas of every description. It certainly would not be
right to refrain from criticism, look on while wrong ideas spread
unchecked and allow them to dominate the field. Mistakes must be
criticized and poisonous weeds fought wherever they crop up. However,
such criticism should not be dogmatic, and the metaphysical method
should not be used, but instead the effort should be made to apply the
dialectical method. What is needed is scientific analysis and convincing
argument. Dogmatic criticism settles nothing. We are against poisonous
weeds of whatever kind, but eve must carefully distinguish between what
is really a poisonous weed and what is really a fragrant flower.
Together with the masses of the people, we must learn to differentiate
carefully between the two and use correct methods to fight the poisonous
weeds.

At the same time as we criticize dogmatism, we must direct our attention
to criticizing revisionism. Revisionism, or Right opportunism, is a
bourgeois trend of thought that is even more dangerous than dogmatism.
The revisionists, the Right opportunists, pay lip-service to Marxism;
they too attack "dogmatism". But what they are really attacking is the
quintessence of Marxism. They oppose or distort materialism and
dialectics, oppose or try to weaken the people's democratic dictatorship
and the leading role of the Communist Party, and oppose or try to weaken
socialist transformation and socialist construction. Even after the
basic victory of our socialist revolution, there will still be a number
of people in our society who vainly hope to restore the capitalist
system and are sure to fight the working class on every front, including
the ideological one. And their right-hand men in this struggle are the
revisionists.

Literally the two slogans -- let a hundred flowers blossom and let a
hundred schools of thought contend -- have no class character; the
proletariat can turn them to account, and so can the bourgeoisie or
others. Different classes, strata and social groups each have their own
views on what are fragrant flowers and what are poisonous weeds. Then,
from the point of view of the masses, what should be the criteria today
for distinguishing fragrant flowers from poisonous weeds? In their
political activities, how should our people judge whether a person's
words and deeds are right or wrong? On the basis of the principles of
our Constitution, the will of the overwhelming majority of our people
and the common political positions which have been proclaimed on various
occasions by our political parties, we consider that, broadly speaking,
the criteria should be as follows:

(1) Words and deeds should help to unite, and not divide, the people of
all our nationalities.

(2) They should be beneficial, and not harmful, to socialist
transformation and socialist construction.

(3) They should help to consolidate, and not undermine or weaken, the
people's democratic dictatorship.

(4) They should help to consolidate, and not undermine or weaken,
democratic centralism.

(5) They should help to strengthen, and not shake off or weaken, the
leadership of the Communist Party.

(6) They should be beneficial, and not harmful, to international
socialist unity and the unity of the peace-loving people of the world.

Of these six criteria, the most important are the two about the
socialist path and the leadership of the Party. These criteria are put
forward not to hinder but to foster the free discussion of questions
among the people. Those who disapprove these criteria can still state
their own views and argue their case. However, so long as the majority
of the people have clear-cut criteria to go by, criticism and
self-criticism can be conducted along proper lines, and these criteria
can be applied to people's words and deeds to determine whether they are
right or wrong, whether they are fragrant flowers or poisonous weeds.
These are political criteria. Naturally, to judge the validity of
scientific theories or assess the aesthetic value of works of art, other
relevant criteria are needed. But these six political criteria are
applicable to all activities in the arts and sciences. In a socialist
country like ours, can there possibly be any useful scientific or
artistic activity which runs counter to these political criteria?

The views set out above are based on China's specific historical
conditions. Conditions vary in different socialist countries and with
different Communist Parties. Therefore, we do not maintain that they
should or must adopt the Chinese way.

The slogan "long-term coexistence and mutual supervision" is also a
product of China's specific historical conditions. It was not put
forward all of a sudden, but had been in the making for several years.
The idea of long-term coexistence had been there for a long time. When
the socialist system was in the main established last year, the slogan
was formulated in explicit terms. Why should the bourgeois and
petty-bourgeois democratic parties be allowed to exist side by side with
the party of the working class over a long period of time? Because we
have no reason for not adopting the policy of long-term coexistence with
all those political parties which are truly devoted to the task of
uniting the people for the cause of socialism and which enjoy the trust
of the people. As early as June 1950, at the Second Session of the First
National Committee of the Political Consultative Conference, I put the
matter in this way:

The people and their government have no reason to reject anyone or deny
him the opportunity of making a living and rendering service to the
country, provided he is really willing to serve the people and provided
he really helped and did a good turn when the people were faced with
difficulties and keeps on doing good without giving up halfway.

What I was discussing here was the political basis for the long-term
coexistence of the various parties. It is the desire as well as the
policy of the Communist Party to exist side by side with the democratic
parties for a long time to come. But whether the democratic parties can
long remain in existence depends not merely on the desire of the
Communist Party but on how well they acquit themselves and on whether
they enjoy the trust of the people. Mutual supervision among the various
parties is also a long-established fact, in the sense that they have
long been advising and criticizing each other. Mutual supervision is
obviously not a one-sided matter; it means that the Communist Party can
exercise supervision over the democratic parties, and vice versa. Why
should the democratic parties be allowed to exercise supervision over
the Communist Party? Because a party as much as an individual has great
need to hear opinions different from its own. We all know that
supervision over the Communist Party is mainly exercised by the working
people and the Party membership. But it augments the benefit to us to
have supervision by the democratic parties too. Of course, the advice
and criticism exchanged by the Communist Party and the democratic
parties will play a positive supervisory role only when they conform to
the six political criteria given above. Thus, we hope that in order to
fit in with the needs of the new society, all the democratic parties
will pay attention to ideological remoulding and strive for long-term
coexistence with the Communist Party and mutual supervision.

IX. ON THE QUESTION OF DISTURBANCES CREATED BY SMALL NUMBERS OF PEOPLE

In 1956, small numbers of workers or students in certain places went on
strike. The immediate cause of these disturbances was the failure to
satisfy some of their demands for material benefits, of which some
should and could have been met, while others were out of place or
excessive and therefore could not be met for the time being. But a more
important cause was bureaucracy on the part of the leadership. In some
cases, the responsibility for such bureaucratic mistakes fell on the
higher authorities, and those at the lower levels were not to blame.
Another cause of these disturbances was lack of ideological and
political education among the workers and students. The same year, in
some agricultural co-operatives there were also disturbances created by
a few of their members, and here too the main causes were bureaucracy on
the part of the leadership and lack of educational work among the
masses.

It should be admitted that among the masses some are prone to pay
attention to immediate, partial and personal interests and do not
understand, or do not sufficiently understand, long-range, national and
collective interests. Because of lack of political and social
experience, quite a number of young people cannot readily see the
contrast between the old China and the new, and it is not easy for them
thoroughly to comprehend the hardships our people went through in the
struggle to free themselves from the oppression of the imperialists and
Kuomintang reactionaries, or the long years of hard work needed before a
fine socialist society can be established. That is why we must
constantly carry on lively and effective political education among the
masses and should always tell them the truth about the difficulties that
crop up and discuss with them how to surmount these difficulties.

We do not approve of disturbances, because contradictions among the
people can be resolved through the method of "unity -- criticism --
unity", while disturbances are bound to cause some losses and are not
conducive to the advance of socialism. We believe that the masses of the
people support socialism, conscientiously observe discipline and are
reasonable, and will certainly not take part in disturbances without
cause. But this does not mean that the possibility of disturbances by
the masses no longer exists in our country. On this question, we should
pay attention to the following. (1) In order to root out the causes of
disturbances, we must resolutely overcome bureaucracy, greatly improve
ideological and political education, and deal with all contradictions
properly. If this is done, generally speaking there will be no
disturbances. (2) When disturbances do occur as a result of poor work on
our part, then we should guide those involved onto the correct path, use
the disturbances as a special means for improving our work and educating
the cadres and the masses, and find solutions to those problems which
were previously left unsolved. In handling any disturbance, we should
take pains and not use over-simple methods, or hastily declare the
matter closed. The ringleaders in disturbances should not be summarily
expelled, except for those who have committed criminal offences or are
active counter-revolutionaries and have to be punished by law. In a
large country like ours, there is nothing to get alarmed about if small
numbers of people create disturbances; on the contrary, such
disturbances will help us get rid of bureaucracy.

There are also a small number of individuals in our society who,
flouting the public interest, wilfully break the law and commit crimes.
They are apt to take advantage of our policies and distort them, and
deliberately put forward unreasonable demands in order to incite the
masses, or deliberately spread rumours to create trouble and disrupt
public order. We do not propose to let these individuals have their way.
On the contrary, proper legal action must be taken against them.
Punishing them is the demand of the masses, and it would run counter to
the popular will if they were not punished.

X. CAN BAD THINGS BE TURNED INTO GOOD THINGS?

In our society, as I have said, disturbances by the masses are bad, and
we do not approve of them. But when disturbances do occur, they enable
us to learn lessons, to overcome bureaucracy and to educate the cadres
and the masses. In this sense, bad things can be turned into good
things. Disturbances thus have a dual character. Every disturbance can
be regarded in this way.

Everybody knows that the Hungarian incident was not a good thing. But it
too had a dual character. Because our Hungarian comrades took proper
action in the course of the incident, what was a bad thing has
eventually turned into a good one. Hungary is now more consolidated than
ever, and all other countries in the socialist camp have also learned a
lesson.

Similarly, the world-wide campaign against communism and the people
which took place in the latter half of 1956 was of course a bad thing.
But it served to educate and temper the Communist Parties and the
working class in all countries, and thus it has turned into a good
thing. In the storm and stress of this period, a number of people in
many countries withdrew from the Communist Party. Withdrawal from the
Party reduces its membership and is, of course, a bad thing, But there
is a good side to it, too. Vacillating elements who are unwilling to
carry on have withdrawn, and the vast majority who are staunch Party
members can be the better united for struggle. Why isn't this a good
thing?

To sum up, we must learn to look at problems from all sides, seeing the
reverse as well as the obverse side of things. In given conditions, a
bad thing can lead to good results and a good thing to bad results. More
than two thousand years ago Lao Tzu said: "Good fortune lieth within
bad, bad fortune lurketh within good."[1] When the Japanese shot their
way into China, they called this a victory. Huge parts of China's
territory were seized, and the Chinese called this a defeat. But victory
was conceived in China's defeat, while defeat was conceived in Japan's
victory. Hasn't history proved this true?

People all over the world are now discussing whether or not a third
world war will break out. On this question, too, we must be mentally
prepared and do some analysis. We stand firmly for peace and against
war. But if the imperialists insist on unleashing another war, we should
not be afraid of it. Our attitude on this question is the same as our
attitude towards any disturbance: first, we are against it; second, we
are not afraid of it. The First World War was followed by the birth of
the Soviet Union with a population of 200 million. The Second World War
was followed by the emergence of the socialist camp with a combined
population of 900 million. If the imperialists insist on launching a
third world war, it is certain that several hundred million more will
turn to socialism, and then there will not be much room left on earth
for the imperialists; it is also likely that the whole structure of
imperialism will completely collapse.

In given conditions, each of the two opposing aspects of a contradiction
invariably transforms itself into its opposite as a result of the
struggle between them. Here, it is the conditions which are essential.
Without the given conditions, neither of the two contradictory aspects
can transform itself into its opposite. Of all the classes in the world
the proletariat is the one which is most eager to change its position,
and next comes the semi-proletariat, for the former possesses nothing at
all while the latter is hardly any better off. The United States now
controls a majority in the United Nations and dominates many parts of
the world -- this state of affairs is temporary and will be changed one
of these days. China's position as a poor country denied its rights in
international affairs will also be changed -- the poor country will
change into a rich one, the country denied its rights into one enjoying
them -- a transformation of things into their opposites. Here, the
decisive conditions are the socialist system and the concerted efforts
of a united people.

XI. ON PRACTISING ECONOMY

Here I wish to speak briefly on practicing economy. We want to carry on
large-scale construction, but our country is still very poor -- herein
lies a contradiction. One way of resolving it is to make a sustained
effort to practice strict economy in every field.

During the movement against the "three evils" in 1952, we fought against
corruption, waste and bureaucracy, with the emphasis on combating
corruption. In 1955 we advocated the practice of economy with great
success, our emphasis then being on combating the unduly high standards
for non-productive projects in capital construction and economizing on
raw materials in industrial production. But at that time economy was not
yet applied in earnest as a guiding principle in all branches of the
national economy, or in government offices, army units, schools and
people's organizations in general. This year we are calling for economy
and the elimination of waste in every sphere throughout the country. We
still lack experience in the work of construction. During the last few
years, great successes have been achieved, but there has also been
waste. We must build up a number of large-scale modern enterprises step
by step to form the mainstay of our industry, without which we shall not
be able to turn China into a powerful modern industrial country within
the coming decades. But the majority of our enterprises should not be
built on such a scale; we should set up more small and medium
enterprises and make full use of the industrial base inherited from the
old society, so as to effect the greatest economy and do more with less
money. Good results have begun to appear in the few months since the
principle of practicing strict economy and combating waste was put
forward, in more emphatic terms than before, by the Second Plenary
Session of the Eighth Central Committee of the Communist Party of China
in November 1956. The present campaign for economy must be conducted in
a thorough and sustained way. Like the criticism of any other fault or
mistake, the fight against waste may be compared to washing one's face.
Don't people wash their faces every day? The Chinese Communist Party,
the democratic parties, the democrats with no party affiliation, the
intellectuals, industrialists and businessmen, workers, peasants and
handicraftsmen -- in short, all our 600 million people -- must strive
for increased production and economy, and against extravagance and
waste. This is of prime importance not only economically, but
politically as well. A dangerous tendency has shown itself of late among
many of our personnel -- an unwillingness to share weal and woe with the
masses, a concern for personal fame and gain. This is very bad. One way
of overcoming it is to streamline our organizations in the course of our
campaign to increase production and practice economy, and to transfer
cadres to lower levels so that a considerable number will return to
productive work. We must see to it that all our cadres and all our
people constantly bear in mind that ours is a large socialist country
but an economically backward and poor one, and that this is a very big
contradiction. To make China prosperous and strong needs several decades
of hard struggle, which means, among other things, pursuing the policy
of building up our country through diligence and thrift, that is,
practicing strict economy and fighting waste.

XII. CHINA'S PATH TO INDUSTRIALIZATION

In discussing our path to industrialization, we are here concerned
principally with the relationship between the growth of heavy industry,
light industry and agriculture. It must be affirmed that heavy industry
is the core of China's economic construction. At the same time, full
attention must be paid to the development of agriculture and light
industry.

As China is a large agricultural country, with over 80 per cent of its
population in the rural areas, agriculture must develop along with
industry, for only thus can industry secure raw materials and a market,
and only thus is it possible to accumulate more funds for building a
powerful heavy industry. Everyone knows that light industry is closely
tied up with agriculture. Without agriculture there can be no light
industry. But it is not yet so clearly understood that agriculture
provides heavy industry with an important market. This fact, however,
will be more readily appreciated as gradual progress in the technical
transformation and modernization of agriculture calls for more and more
machinery, fertilizer, water conservancy and electric power projects and
transport facilities for the farms, as well as fuel and building
materials for the rural consumers. During the period of the Second and
Third Five-Year Plans, the entire national economy will benefit if we
can achieve an even greater growth in our agriculture and thus induce a
correspondingly greater development of light industry. As agriculture
and light industry develop, heavy industry, assured of its market and
funds, will grow faster. Hence what may seem to be a slower pace of
industrialization will actually not be so slow, and indeed may even be
faster. In three five-year plans or perhaps a little longer, China's
annual steel output can be raised to 20,000,000 tons or more, as
compared with the peak pre-liberation output of something over 900,000
tons in 1943. This will gladden the people in both town and country.

I do not propose to dwell on economic questions today. With barely seven
years of economic construction behind us, we still lack experience and
need to accumulate it. Neither had we any experience in revolution when
we first started, and it was only after we had taken a number of tumbles
and acquired experience that we won nation-wide victory. What we must
now demand of ourselves is to gain experience in economic construction
in a shorter period of time than it took us to gain experience in
revolution, and not to pay as high a price for it. Some price we will
have to pay, but we hope it will not be as high as that paid during the
period of revolution. We must realize that there is a contradiction here
-- the contradiction between the objective laws of economic development
of a socialist society and our subjective cognition of them -- which
needs to be resolved in the course of practice. This contradiction also
manifests itself as a contradiction between different people, that is, a
contradiction between those in whom the reflection of these objective
laws is relatively accurate and those in whom the reflection is
relatively inaccurate; this, too, is a contradiction among the people.
Every contradiction is an objective reality, and it is our task to
reflect it and resolve it in as nearly correct a fashion as we can.

In order to turn China into an industrial country, we must learn
conscientiously from the advanced experience of the Soviet Union. The
Soviet Union has been building socialism for forty years, and its
experience is very valuable to us. Let us ask: Who designed and equipped
so many important factories for us? Was it the United States? Or
Britain? No, neither the one nor the other. Only the Soviet Union was
willing to do so, because it is a socialist country and our ally. In
addition to the Soviet Union, the fraternal countries in East Europe
have also given us some assistance. It is perfectly true that we should
learn from the good experience of all countries, socialist or
capitalist, about this there is no argument. But the main thing is still
to learn from the Soviet Union. Now there are two different attitudes
towards learning from others. One is the dogmatic attitude of
transplanting everything, whether or not it is suited to our conditions.
This is no good. The other attitude is to use our heads and learn those
things which suit our conditions, that is, to absorb whatever experience
is useful to us. That is the attitude we should adopt.

To strengthen our solidarity with the Soviet Union, to strengthen our
solidarity with all the socialist countries--this is our fundamental
policy, this is where our basic interests lie. Then there are the Asian
and African countries and all the peace-loving countries and peoples
--we must strengthen and develop our solidarity with them. United with
these two forces, we shall not stand alone. As for the imperialist
countries, we should unite with their people and strive to coexist
peacefully with those countries, do business with them and prevent a
possible war, but under no circumstances should we harbour any
unrealistic notions about them.

_NOTES_

1. _Lao Tzu_, Chapter LVIII.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

Save
