
Leon Trotsky



TO BUILD COMMUNIST PARTIES AND AN INTERNATIONAL ANEW


(July 1933)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Written on July 15, 1933.
First Published in English: 1943 in _The Fourth International_

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Introduction by _The Fourth International_

EDITOR’S NOTE: The official dissolution of the Communist International
comes almost ten years after the proclamation by Leon Trotsky that the
Third International was dead as the world instrument for the socialist
revolution. It was on July 15, 1933 that Trotsky wrote his theses,
reprinted below, in justification of this conclusion and the need of
building the Fourth International.

In his summary speech before the International Commission of Inquiry
into the Moscow Trials, on April 17, 1937, Leon Trotsky reviewed his
position as follows:

“In the course of the years from 1923 to 1933, with respect to the
Soviet state, its leading party and the Communist International, I held
the view expressed in those chiselled words: _Reform, but not
revolution._ This position was fed by the hope that with favorable
developments in Europe, the Left Opposition could regenerate the
Bolshevik Party by pacific means, democratically reform the Soviet
state, and set the Communist International back on the path of Marxism.
It was only the victory of Hitler, prepared by the fatal policy of the
Kremlin, and the complete inability of the Comintern to draw any lessons
from the tragic experience of Germany, which convinced me and my
ideological companions that the old Bolshevik Party and the Third
International were forever dead, as far as the cause of Socialism WSE
concerned.” (_The Case of Leon Trotsky_ , p.476.)

Trotsky’s 1933 theses were submitted for discussion to the various
sections of the International Communist League (the original name of the
Trotskyist organization) and were adopted by an overwhelming majority.
Within a few weeks of their adoption a resolution “On the Need of a New
International And Its Principles” was issued under the signatures of the
following four organizations: The International Left Opposition
(Bolshevik-Leninist); Socialist Labor Party of Germany (SAP);
Independent Socialist Party of Holland (OSP); Revolutionary Socialist
Party of Holland (RSP). Of the original signatories to this resolution
only the Trotskyists—including a left wing in the Dutch
parties—continued the work of building the Fourth International.

The Russian text of Trotsky’s 1933 theses was first published under the
signature G. Gurow in the _Bulletin of the Russian Opposition_ ,
Nos.36-37, October, 1933.The translation by John G. Wright is a new one
from the original.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Orientation Toward Reforming The Comintern

From the day it was founded the Left Opposition has set itself the task
of reforming the Comintern and regenerating the latter through Marxist
criticism and internal faction work. In a whole number of countries,
especially in Germany, the events of recent years have revealed with
overwhelming force the fatal character of the policies of bureaucratic
centrism. But the Stalinist bureaucracy, armed with extraordinary
resources, has managed not unsuccessfully to counterpose its caste
interests and prejudices to the demands of historical development. As a
result, the evolution of the Comintern has unfolded not along the line
of regeneration but along that of corrosion and disintegration.

But the orientation toward “reform,” taken as a whole, was not a
mistake: it represented a necessary stage in the development of the
Marxist wing of the Comintern; it provided an opportunity for training
cadres of Bolshevik-Leninists; and it did not pass without leaving its
mark on the working-class movement as a whole. The policy of the
Stalinist bureaucracy throughout this period remained under the pressure
of the Left Opposition. The progressive measures adopted by the
government of the USSR, which acted to check the offensive of Thermidor,
were only partial and belated borrowings from the Left Opposition.
Analogous manifestations, but on a smaller scale, could be observed in
the life of all the sections of the Comintern.

It should be added that the degree of degeneration of a revolutionary
party cannot, as a rule, be established _a priori_, on the basis of
symptoms alone. The living verification of events is indispensable.
Theoretically it was still impermissible last year to have considered as
absolutely excluded that the Bolshevik-Leninists, basing themselves on
the sharpening of the class struggle, could succeed in impelling the
Comintern to take the road of actual struggle against fascism. The
simultaneous attempt of the SAP in Germany to assume an independent
position did not exert an influence on the course of events precisely
because the masses were waiting in the critical moment for the political
leadership of their old organizations. In conducting the policy of a
faction and educating its cadres on the experience of this policy, the
Left Opposition, however, did not hide from itself nor from others that
a new defeat of the proletariat, resulting from the policy of centrism,
would inevitably acquire a decisive character and would demand a drastic
review of our position on the question: faction or party?

The Change Of Orientation

The most dangerous thing in politics is to fall captive to one’s own
formula that yesterday was appropriate, but is bereft of all content
today.

Theoretically, the collapse of the German Communist Party still left two
courses open to the Stalinist bureaucracy: either a complete review of
the politics and the regime; or, on the contrary, a complete
strangulation of all signs of life in the sections of the Comintern. The
Left Opposition was guided by this theoretical possibility when, after
advancing the slogan of a new party for Germany, it still left open the
question of the fate of the Comintern. It was, however, clear that the
next few weeks would bring an answer and there was far too little hope
that the answer would be a favorable one.

Everything that has taken place since March 5: the resolution of the
presidium of the ECCI on the situation in Germany; the silent submission
of all the sections to this shameful resolution; the anti-fascist
congress in Paris; the official line of the émigré Central Committee of
the German Communist Party; the fate of the Austrian Communist Party;
the fate of the Bulgarian Communist Party, etc. – all this testifies
incontestably that the fate of not only the German Communist Party but
also the entire Comintern was decided in Germany.

The Moscow leadership has not only proclaimed as infallible the policy
which guaranteed victory to Hitler, but has also prohibited all
discussion of what had occurred. And this shameful interdiction was not
violated, nor overthrown. No national congresses; no international
congress; no discussions at party meetings; no discussion in the press!
An organization which was not roused by the thunder of fascism and which
submits docilely to such outrageous acts of the bureaucracy demonstrates
thereby that it is dead and that nothing can ever revive it. To say this
openly and publicly is our direct duty toward the proletariat and its
future. In all our subsequent work it is necessary to take as our point
of departure the historical collapse of the official Communist
International.

Realism Versus Pessimism

The fact that two parties, the Social Democratic and the Communist,
which arose half a century apart and which both proceeded from the
theory of Marxism and the class interests of the proletariat, could have
come to such a sad end – the one through base treachery, the other
through bankruptcy – can engender pessimistic moods even among the
advanced workers. “Where is the guarantee that a new revolutionary
selection will not suffer the same fate?” Those who demand guarantees in
advance should in general renounce revolutionary politics. The causes
for the downfall of the Social Democracy and of official Communism must
be sought not in Marxist theory and not in the bad qualities of those
people who applied it, but in the concrete conditions of the historical
process. It is not a question of counterposing abstract principles, but
rather of the struggle of living social forces, with its inevitable ups
and downs, with the degeneration of organizations, with the passing of
entire generations into discard, and with the necessity which therefore
arises of mobilizing fresh forces on a new historical stage. No one has
bothered to pave in advance the road of revolutionary upsurge for the
proletariat. With inevitable halts and partial retreats it is necessary
to move forward on a road crisscrossed by countless obstacles and
covered with the debris of the past Those who are frightened by this had
better step aside.

But how explain the fact that our grouping, whose analysis and prognosis
has been verified by the entire course of events, is growing so slowly?
The cause must be looked for in the general course of the class
struggle. The victory of fascism seizes tens of millions. Political
prognoses are accessible only to thousands or tens of thousands who,
moreover, feel the pressure of millions. A revolutionary tendency cannot
score stormy victories at a time when the proletariat as a whole is
suffering the greatest defeats. But this is no justification for letting
one’s hands hang. Precisely in the periods of revolutionary ebb tide are
cadres formed and tempered which will later be called upon to lead the
masses in the new assault.

New Reverses

Those attempts which were made more than once in the past to create a
“second party” or the “Fourth International” emanated from the sectarian
experience of isolated groups and circles “disillusioned” with
Bolshevism and, in consequence, led each time to failure. We take as the
point of departure not our own subjective “dissatisfaction” and
“disillusionment” but the objective march of the class struggle. All the
conditions of the development of the proletarian revolution imperiously
demand a new organization of the vanguard and provide the necessary
prerequisites for it.

The disintegration of the Social Democracy now proceeds parallel with
the collapse of the Comintern. However profound the reaction within the
proletariat itself, hundreds of thousands of workers in the whole world
must already be asking themselves about the further course of struggle
and a new organization of forces. Other hundreds of thousands will join
them in the near future. To demand of these workers, a section of whom
left the Comintern with indignation, while the majority did not belong
to the Comintern even in its best years, that they formally accept the
leadership of the Stalinist bureaucracy, which is incapable of
forgetting or learning anything, is to occupy oneself with Quixotism and
to hinder the formation of the proletarian vanguard.

Undoubtedly, in the ranks of the Stalinist organizations, will be found
sincere Communists, who will greet with fear and even with indignation
our new orientation. Some of them might perhaps temporarily replace a
feeling of sympathy with one of hostility. But it is necessary to be
guided not by sentimental and personal considerations but by mass
criteria.

At a time when hundreds of thousands and millions of workers, especially
in Germany, are departing from Communism, in part to fascism and in the
main into the camp of indifferentism, thousands and tens of thousands of
Social Democratic workers, under the impact of the self-same defeat, are
evolving to the left, to the side of Communism. There cannot however,
even be talk of their accepting the hopelessly discredited Stalinist
leadership.

Up till now these left socialist organizations have held against us our
refusal to break with the Comintern and to build independent parties.
This sharp disagreement has now been removed by the march of
development. Thereby the discussion of formal, organizational questions
is shifted over to the programmatic, political plane. The new party will
rise higher than the old one only if, by taking its stand firmly on the
grounds of the decisions of the first four congresses of the Comintern,
it is capable in its program, strategy, tactics, and organization of
taking into account the terrible lessons of the last ten years.

The Bolshevik-Leninists must enter into open discussions with the
revolutionary socialist organizations. As the basis for discussion we
shall propose the eleven points adopted by our Pre-Conference (after
changing the point on “faction and party” in the spirit of the present
theses). We are, of course, prepared to discuss attentively and in a
comradely manner all other programmatic proposals. We must and shall
demonstrate that principled irreconcilability has nothing in common with
sectarian snobbishness. We shall show that Marxist politic consists in
attracting reformist workers into the camp of revolution and not in
repelling revolutionary workers into the camp of fascism.

The formation in several countries of strong revolutionary
organizations, free of any responsibility for the crimes and mistakes of
the reformist and centrist bureaucracies, armed with the Marxist program
and a clear revolutionary perspective, will open a new era in the
development of the world proletariat. These organizations will attract
all the genuine Communist elements who still cannot bring themselves
today to break with the Stalinist bureaucracy, and, what is more
important, they will gradually attract under their banner the young
generation of workers.

The USSR and the CPSU

The existence of the Soviet Union, despite the far-advanced degeneration
of the workers’ state, remains even now a fact of immeasurable
revolutionary significance. The collapse of the Soviet Union would lead
to terrible reaction in the whole world, perhaps for decades to come.
The struggle for the preservation, rehabilitation, and strengthening of
the first workers’ state is indissolubly bound up with the struggle of
the world proletariat for the socialist revolution.

The dictatorship of the Stalinist bureaucracy arose as a result of the
backwardness of the USSR (the predominance of the peasantry) and the
tardiness of the proletarian revolution in the West (the absence of
independent revolutionary parties of the proletariat). In its turn, the
rule of the Stalinist bureaucracy has led not only to the degeneration
of the dictatorship of the proletariat in the Soviet Union, but also to
the terrible weakening of the proletarian vanguard in the whole world.
The contradiction between the progressive role of the Soviet state and
the reactionary role of the Stalinist bureaucracy is one of the
manifestations of the “law of uneven development” In our revolutionary
politics we must take this historically given contradiction as our point
of departure.

The so-called friends of the Soviet Union (left democrats, pacifists,
Brandlerites, and the like) repeat the argument of the Comintern
functionaries that the struggle against the Stalinist bureaucracy, i.e.,
first of all criticism of its false policies, “helps the
counter-revolution.” This is the standpoint of the political lackeys of
the bureaucracy, but never that of revolutionists. The Soviet Union both
internally and externally can be defended only by means of a correct
policy. All other considerations are either secondary or simply lying
phrases.

The present CPSU is not a party but an apparatus of domination in the
hands of an uncontrolled bureaucracy. Within the framework of the CPSU
and outside of it takes place the grouping of the scattered elements of
the two basic parties: the proletarian and the Thermidorean-Bonapartist.
Rising above both of them, the centrist bureaucracy wages a war of
annihilation against the Bolshevik-Leninists. While coming into sharp
clashes from time to time with their Thermidorean half-allies, the
Stalinists, nevertheless, clear the road for the latter by crushing,
strangling, and corrupting the Bolshevik Party.

If without proletarian revolution in the West the USSR cannot come to
socialism, then without the regeneration of a genuine proletarian
International, the Russian Bolshevik-Leninists will not be able, with
their own forces alone, to regenerate the Bolshevik Party and to save
the dictatorship of the proletariat.

The USSR and the Comintern

The defense of the Soviet Union against the threat of military
intervention has now become a task more acute than ever before. The
official sections of the Comintern are as impotent in this field as in
all others. On their lips, the defense of the Soviet Union has become a
ritualistic phrase, bereft of all content. The inadequacy of the
Comintern is being covered up by such undignified comedies as the
antiwar congress in Amsterdam and the antifascist congress in Paris. The
actual resistance of the Comintern to the military intervention of the
imperialists will prove even more insignificant than its resistance to
Hitler. To nourish any illusions on this score is to head blindfolded
toward a new catastrophe. For the active defense of the Soviet Union
genuine revolutionary organizations are needed, independent of the
Stalinist bureaucracy, standing on their own feet and enjoying support
among the masses.

The establishment and growth of these revolutionary organizations, their
struggle for the Soviet Union, their constant readiness for a united
front with the Stalinists against intervention and counterrevolution –
all this will have an enormous importance for the internal development
of the Soviet republic. The Stalinists, insofar as they remain in power,
will have all the less opportunity to evade the united front as the
dangers, both domestic and foreign, become more acute, and as the
independent organization of the world proletarian vanguard becomes a
greater force. The new relationship of forces will act to weaken the
dictatorship of the bureaucracy, to strengthen the Bolshevik-Leninists
inside the USSR, and to open up before the workers’ republic as a whole
far more favorable perspectives.

Only the creation of the Marxist International, completely independent
of the Stalinist bureaucracy and counterposed politically to it, can
save the USSR from collapse by binding its destiny with the destiny of
the world proletarian revolution.

“Liquidationism”

Bureaucratic charlatans (and their lackeys, like the Brandlerites) talk
about our “liquidationism. “ They repeat senselessly and unconscionably
words torn out of the old vocabulary of Bolshevism. Liquidationism was
the designation given to that tendency which, under “constitutional”
Czarism, rejected the need for an illegal party, for it sought to
replace revolutionary struggle by an adaptation to counterrevolutionary
“legality.” What have we in common with the liquidators? It is far more
appropriate to recall in this connection the ultimatists (Bogdanov and
others) who fully recognized the need of an illegal organization but
turned it into an instrument of hopelessly false policies: after the
crushing of the revolution they posed as the immediate task the
preparation of an armed uprising. Lenin did not hesitate to break with
them, although there were not a few impeccable revolutionists among
them. (The best of them later returned to the ranks of Bolshevism.)

Equally false in character are the assertions of Stalinists and their
Brandlerite lackeys to the effect that the Left Opposition is creating
an “August Conference” against “Bolshevism.” Referred to here is the
attempt of 1912, one of the innumerable attempts to unite Bolsheviks and
Mensheviks. (Let us recall that Stalin made such an attempt not in
August 1912, but in March 1917!) For this analogy to have even a shadow
of meaning, it would be necessary in the first place to acknowledge the
Stalinist bureaucracy as the bearer of Bolshevism; and secondly, it
would be necessary for us to pose the question of uniting the Second and
Third Internationals. There cannot even be talk of either proposition!
The charlatan analogy is designed to cover up the fact that the
Brandlerite opportunists are trying to curry favor with the Stalinist
centrists on the basis of a mutual amnesty, whereas the
Bolshevik-Leninists are posing the task of building the proletarian
party on a principled foundation, tested in the greatest battles, the
victories and defeats of the imperialist epoch.

On The New Road

The task of these theses is to summon the comrades to cross off the
completed historical stage and to sketch out new perspectives for work.
But what has been said above does not at all predetermine the immediate
practical steps, the concrete changes in policy, the tempos and method
of shifting to the new road. Only after a principled unanimity has been
secured with regard to the new orientation – and our previous experience
permits me to think that such a unanimity will be achieved by us – will
there be placed on the order of the day the concrete tactical questions
applicable to the conditions in each separate country.

In any case, under discussion now is not the immediate proclamation of
new parties and of an independent international, but of preparing for
them. The new perspective signifies first of all that talk of “reform”
and demands to restore oppositionists in the official parties must be
put aside as utopian and reactionary. The day-to-day work must assume an
independent character, determined by our own possibilities and forces,
and not by the formal criterion of “faction.” The Left Opposition ceases
completely to feel and act as an “opposition.” It becomes an independent
organization, clearing its own road. It not only builds its own
fractions in the Social Democratic and Stalinist parties, but conducts
independent work among nonparty and unorganized workers. It creates its
own bases of support in the trade unions, independently of the
trade-union policy of the Stalinist bureaucracy. It participates in
elections under its own banner, whenever favorable conditions for this
obtain. In relation to reformist and centrist labor organizations
(including the Stalinists) it is guided by the general principles of the
united-front policy. In particular, it applies the policy of the united
front especially in order to defend the USSR against external
intervention and internal counterrevolution.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

_The Rise of Fascism in Germany_ Index

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[return] 

Last updated on: 25.4.2007

Save
