
Leon Trotsky



FOR A WORKERS’ UNITED FRONT AGAINST FASCISM


(December 1931)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Written in exile in Turkey, 8 December 1931.
BULLETIN OF THE OPPOSITION, No. 27, March 1932.
Translation by Morris Lewitt with slight variations in THE MILITANT,
Vol. V No. 2 (Whole No. 98), 9 January 1932, pp. 1 & 4.
Trotsky’s own title was _What’s Wrong With the Current Policy of the
German Communist Party?_

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Germany is now passing through one of those great historic hours upon
which the fate of the German people, the fate of Europe, and in
significant measure the fate of all humanity, will depend for decades.
If you place a ball on top of a pyramid, the slightest impact can cause
it to roll down either to the left or to the right. That is the
situation approaching with every hour in Germany today. There are forces
which would like the bail to roll down towards the right and break the
back of the working class. There are forces which would like the ball to
remain at the top. That is a utopia. The ball cannot remain at the top
of the pyramid. The Communists want the ball to roll down toward the
left and break the back of capitalism. But it is not enough to want; one
must know how. Let us calmly reflect once more: is the policy carried on
at present by the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Germany
correct or incorrect?

What Does Hitler Want?

The fascists are growing very rapidly. The Communists are also growing
but much more slowly. The growth at the extreme poles shows that the
ball cannot maintain itself at the top of the pyramid. The rapid growth
of the fascists signifies the danger that the ball may roll down toward
the right. Therein lies an enormous danger.

Hitler emphasizes that he is against a _coup d’état_. In order to
strangle democracy once and for all, he wants to come to power by no
other route than the democratic road. Can we seriously believe this?

Of course, if the fascists could figure on obtaining an absolute
majority of the votes at the next elections in a peaceful way, then they
would perhaps even prefer this road. In reality, however, this road is
unthinkable for them. It is stupid to believe that the Nazis would grow
uninterruptedly, as they do now, for an unlimited period of time. Sooner
or later they will drain their social reservoir. Fascism has introduced
into its own ranks such terrific contradictions, that the moment must
come in which the flow ceases to replace the ebb. This moment can arrive
long before the fascists have united about them even half of the votes.
They will not be able to halt for they will have nothing more to look
for here. They will be forced to resort to an overturn.

But even apart from all this, the fascists are cut off from the
democratic road. The immense growth of the political contradictions in
the country, the stark brigands’ agitation of the fascists, will
inevitably lead to a situation in which the closer the fascists approach
a majority, the more heated the atmosphere will become and the more
extensive the unfolding of the conflicts and struggles will be. With
this perspective, civil war is absolutely inevitable. Consequently, the
question of the seizure of power by the fascists will not be decided by
vote, but by civil war, which the fascists are preparing and provoking.

Can we assume even for one minute that Hitler and his counselors do not
realize and foresee this? That would mean to consider them blockheads.
There is no greater crime in politics than that of hoping for
stupidities on the part of a strong enemy. But if Hitler is not unaware
that the road to power leads through the most gruesome civil war, then
it means that his speeches about the peaceful democratic road are only a
cloak, that is, a stratagem. In that case, it is all the more necessary
to keep one’s eyes open.

What Is Concealed Behind Hitler’s Stratagem?

His calculations are quite simple and obvious: he wants to lull his
antagonists with the long-run perspective of the parliamentary growth of
the Nazis in order to catch them napping and to deal them a deathblow at
the right moment It is quite possible that Hitler’s courtesies to
democratic parliamentarism may, moreover, help to set up some sort of
coalition in the immediate future in which the fascists will obtain the
most important posts and employ them in turn for their _coup d’état_.
For it is entirely clear that the coalition, let us assume, between the
Center and the fascists will not be a stage in the democratic solution
of the question, but a step closer to the coup d’etat under conditions
most favorable to the fascists.

We Must Plan According to the Shorter Perspective

All this means that even independently of the desires of the fascist
general staff, the solution can intervene in the course Of the next few
months, if not weeks. This circumstance is of tremendous importance in
elaborating a correct policy. If we allow the fascists to seize power in
two or three months, then the struggle against them next year will be
much harder than in this. All revolutionary plans laid out for two,
three, or five years in advance will prove to be only wretched and
disgraceful twaddle, if the working class allows the fascists to gain
power in the course of the next two, three, or five months. In the
polity of revolutionary crises, the calculation of time is of just as
decisive importance as it is in war operations.

Let us take another, more remote example for the clarification of our
idea. Hugo Urbahns, who considers himself a “Left Communist” declares
the German party bankrup , politically done for, and proposes to create
a new party. If Urbahns were right, it would mean that the victory of
the fascists is certain. For, in order to create a new party, years are
required (and there has been nothing to prove that the party of Urbahns
would in any sense be better than Thälmann’s party: when Urbahns was at
the head of the party, there were by no means fewer mistakes).

Yes, should the fascists really conquer power, that would mean not only
the physical destruction of the Communist Party, but veritable political
bankruptcy for it. An ignominious defeat in a struggle against bands of
human rubbish – would never be forgiven the Communist International and
its German section by the many-millioned German proletariat. The seizure
of power by the fascists would therefore most probably signify the
necessity of creating a new revolutionary party, and in all likelihood
also a new International. That would be a frightful historical
catastrophe. But to assume today that all this is unavoidable can be
done only by genuine liquidators, those who under the mantle of hollow
phrases are really hastening to capitulate like cravens in the face of
the struggle and without a struggle. With this conception we
Bolshevik-Leninists, who are called “Trotskyists” by the Stalinists,
have nothing in common.

We are unshakably convinced that the victory over the fascists is
possible – not after their coming to power, not after five, ten, or
twenty years of their rule, but now, under the given conditions, in the
coming months and weeks.

Thälmann Considers the Victory of Fascism Inevitable

A correct policy is necessary in order to achieve victory. That is, we
need a policy appropriate to the present situation, to the present
relationship of forces, and not to the situation that may develop in
one, two, or three years, when the question of power will already have
been decided for a long time.

The whole misfortune lies in the fact that the policy of the Central
Committee of the German Communist Party, in part consciously and in part
unconsciously, proceeds from the recognition of the inevitability of a
fascist victory. In fact, in the appeal for the “Red United Front”
published on November 29, 1931, the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of Germany proceeds from the idea that it is impossible to defeat
fascism without first defeating the Social Democracy. The same idea is
repeated in all possible shades in Thälmann’s article. Is this idea
correct? On the historical scale it is unconditionally correct. But that
does not at all mean that with its aid, that is, by simple repetition,
one can solve the questions of the day. An idea, correct from the point
of view of revolutionary strategy as a whole, is converted into a lie
and at that into a reactionary lie, if it is not translated into the
language of tactics. Is it correct that in order to destroy unemployment
and misery it is first necessary to destroy capitalism? It is correct.
But only the biggest blockhead can conclude from all this, that we do
not have to fight this very day, with all of our forces, against the
measures with whose aid capitalism is increasing the misery of the
workers.

Can we expect that in the course of the next few months the Communist
Party will defeat both the Social Democracy and fascism? No
normal-thinking person who can read and calculate would risk such a
contention. Politically, the question stands like this: Can we
successfully repel fascism now, in the course of the next few months,
that is, with the existence of a greatly weakened, but still
(unfortunately) very strong Social Democracy? The Central Committee
replies in the negative. In other words, Thälmann considers the victory
of fascism inevitable.

Once Again: The Russian Experience

In order to express my thought as clearly and as concretely as possible
I will come back once more to the experience with the Kornilov uprising.
On August 26 (old style), 1917, General Kornilov led his Cossack corps
and one irregular division against Petrograd. At the helm of power stood
Kerensky, lackey of the bourgeoisie and three-quarters a confederate of
Kornilov. Lenin was still in hiding because of the accusation that he
was in the service of the Hohenzollerns. For the same accusation, I was
at that time incarcerated in solitary confinement in Kresty Prison. How
did the Bolsheviks proceed in this question? They also had a right to
say: “In order to defeat the Korniloviad – we must first defeat the
Kerenskiad.” They said this more than once, for it was correct and
necessary for all the subsequent propaganda. But that was entirely
inadequate for offering resistance to Kornilov on August 26, and on the
days that followed, and for preventing him from butchering the Petrograd
proletariat. That is why the Bolsheviks did not content themselves with
a general appeal to the workers and soldiers to break with the
conciliators and to support the red united front of the Bolsheviks. No,
the Bolsheviks proposed the united front struggle to the Mensheviks and
the Social Revolutionaries and created together with them joint
organizations of struggle. Was this correct or incorrect? Let Thälmann
answer that. In order to show even more vividly how matters stood with
the united front, I will cite the following incident: immediately upon
my release after the trade unions had put up bail for me, I went
directly to the Committee for National Defense, where I discussed and
adopted decisions regarding the struggle against Kornilov with the
Menshevik Dan and the Social Revolutionary Gotz [2], allies of Kerensky
who had kept me in prison. Was this right or wrong? Let Remmele answer
that.

Is Brüning the “Lesser Evil”?

The Social Democracy supports Brüning, votes for him, assumes
responsibility for him before the masses-on the grounds that the Brüning
government is the “lesser evil.” DIE ROTE FAHNE attempts to ascribe the
same view to me – on the grounds that I expressed myself against the
stupid and shameful participation of the Communists in the Hitler
referendum. But have the German Left Opposition and myself in particular
demanded that the Communists vote for and support Brüning? We Marxists
regard Brüning and Hitler, Braun included, as component parts of one and
the same system. The question as to which one of them is the “lesser
evil” has no sense, for the system we are fighting against needs all
these elements. But these elements are momentarily involved in conflicts
with one another and the party of the proletariat must take advantage of
these conflicts in the interest of the revolution.

There are seven keys in the musical scale. The question as to which of
these keys is “better” – _do_, _re_, or _sol_ – is a nonsensical
question. But the musician must know when to strike and what keys to
strike. The abstract question of who is the lesser evil – Brüning or
Hitler – is just as nonsensical. It is necessary to know which of these
keys to strike. Is that clear? For the feeble-minded let us cite another
example. When one of my enemies sets before me small daily portions of
poison and the second, on the other hand, is about to shoot straight at
me, then I will first knock the revolver out of the hand of my second
enemy, for this gives me an opportunity to get rid of my first enemy.
But that does not at all mean that the poison is a “lesser evil” in
comparison with the revolver.

The misfortune consists precisely of the fact that the leaders of the
German Communist Party have placed themselves on the same ground as the
Social Democracy, only with inverted prefixes: the Social Democracy
votes for Brüning, recognizing in him the lesser evil. The Communists,
on the other hand, who refuse to trust either Braun or Brüning in any
way (and that is absolutely the right way to act), go into the streets
to support Hitler’s referendum, that is, the attempt of the fascists to
overthrow Brüning. But by this they themselves have recognized in Hitler
the lesser evil, for the victory of the referendum would not have
brought the proletariat into power, but Hitler. To be sure, it is
painful to have to argue over such ABC questions. It is sad, very sad
indeed, when musicians like Remmele, instead of distinguishing between
the keys, stamp with their boots on the keyboard.

It is Not a Question of the Workers Who Have Already Left the Social Democracy, But of Those Who Still Remain With It

The thousands upon thousands of Noskes, Welses, and Hilferdings prefer,
in the last analysis, fascism to Communism. [3] But for that they must
once and for all tear themselves loose from the workers. Today this is
not yet the case. Today the Social Democracy as a whole, with all its
internal antagonisms, is forced into sharp conflict with the fascists.
It is our task to take advantage of this conflict and not to unite the
antagonists against us.

The front must now be directed against fascism. And this common front of
direct struggle against fascism, embracing the entire proletariat, must
be utilized in the struggle against the Social Democracy, directed as a
flank attack, but no less effective for all that.

It is necessary to show by deeds a complete readiness to make a bloc
with the Social Democrats against the fascists in all cases in which
they will accept a bloc. To say to the Social Democratic workers: “Cast
your leaders aside and join our “nonparty” united front” means to add
just one more hollow phrase to a thousand others. We must understand how
to tear the workers away from their leaders in reality. But reality
today is-the struggle against fascism. There are and doubtless will be
Social Democratic workers who are prepared to fight hand in hand with
the Communist workers against the fascists, regardless of the desires or
even against the desires of the Social Democratic organizations. With
such progressive elements it is obviously necessary to establish the
closest possible contact. At the present time, however, they are not
great in number. The German worker has been raised in the spirit of
organization and of discipline. This has its strong as well as its weak
sides. The overwhelming majority of the Social Democratic workers will
fight against the fascists, but – for the present at least – only
together with their organizations. This stage cannot be skipped. We must
help the Social Democratic workers in action – in this new and
extraordinary situation – to test the value of their organizations and
leaders at this time, when it is a matter of life and death for the
working class.

We Must Force the Social Docracy into a Bloc Against the Fascists

The trouble is that in the Central Committee of the Communist Party
there are many frightened opportunists. They have heard that opportunism
consists of a love for blocs, and that is why they are against blocs.
They do not understand the difference between, let us say, a
parliamentary agreement and an ever-so-modest agreement for struggle in
a strike or in defense of workers’ printshops against fascist bands.

Election agreements, parliamentary compromises concluded between the
revolutionary party and the Social Democracy serve, as a rule, to the
advantage of the Social Democracy. Practical agreements for mass action,
for purposes of struggle, are always useful to the revolutionary party.
The Anglo-Russian Committee was an impermissible type of bloc of two
leaderships on one common political platform, vague, deceptive, binding
no one to any action at all. The maintenance of this bloc at the time of
the British General Strike, when the General Council assumed the role of
strikebreaker, signified, on the part of the Stalinists, a policy of
betrayal. [4]

No common platform with the Social Democracy, or with the leaders of the
German trade unions, no common publications, banners, placards! March
separately, but strike together! Agree only how to strike, whom to
strike, and when to strike! Such an agreement can be concluded even with
the devil himself, with his grandmother, and even with Noske and
Grezesinsky. [5] On one condition, not to bind one’s hands.

It is necessary, without any delay, finally to elaborate a practical
system of measures – not with the aim of merely “exposing” the Social
Democracy (before the Communists), but with the aim of actual struggle
against fascism. The question of factory defense organizations, of
unhampered activity on the part of the factory councils, the
inviolability of the workers’ organizations and institutions, the
question of arsenals that may be seized by the fascists, the question of
measures in the case of an emergency, that is, of the coordination of
the actions of the Communist and the Social Democratic divisions in the
struggle, etc., etc., must be dealt with in this program.

In the struggle against fascism, the factory councils occupy a
tremendously important position. Here a particularly precise program of
action is necessary. Every factory must become an anti-fascist bulwark,
with its own commandants and its own battalions. It is necessary to have
a map of the fascist barracks and all other fascist strongholds, in
every city and in every district The fascists are attempting to encircle
the revolutionary strongholds. The encirclers must be encircled. On this
basis, an agreement with the Social Democratic and trade-union
organizations is not only permissible, but a duty. To reject this for
reasons of “principle” (in reality because of bureaucratic stupidity, or
what is still worse, because of cowardice) is to give direct and
immediate aid to fascism.

A practical program of agreements with the Social Democratic workers was
proposed by us as far back as September 1930 (_The Turn in the Comintern
and the German Situation_), that is, a year and a quarter ago. What has
the leadership undertaken in this direction? Next to nothing. The
Central Committee of the Communist Party has taken up everything except
that which constitutes its direct task. How much valuable, irretrievable
time has been lost! As a matter of fact, not much time is left. The
program of action must be strictly practical, strictly objective, to the
point, without any of those artificial “claims,” without any
reservations, so that every average Social Democratic worker can say to
himself. what the Communists propose is completely indispensable for the
struggle against fascism. On this basis, we must pull the Social
Democratic workers along with us by our example, and criticize their
leaders who will inevitably serve as a check and a brake. Only in this
way is victory possible.

A Good Quotation From Lenin

The present-day epigones, that is, the thoroughly bad disciples of
Lenin, like to cover up their shortcomings on every occasion that offers
itself with quotations – often entirely irrelevant. For Marxists, the
question is not decided by a quotation, but by means of the correct
method. If one is guided by correct methods, it is not hard also to find
suitable quotations. After I had drawn the above analogy with the
Kornilov insurrection, I said to myself: We can probably find a
theoretical elucidation of our bloc with the conciliators in the
struggle against Kornilov, in Lenin. And here is what I actually found
in the second part of Volume XIV of the Russian edition, in a letter
from Lenin to the Central Committee, written at the beginning of
September 1917:

“Even at the present time, we are not duty-bound to support the Kerensky
government That would be unprincipled. It is asked: then we are not to
fight against Kornilov? Of course we are. But that is not one and the
same thing. There is a limit to this; it is being transgressed by many
Bolsheviks who fail into ‘conciliationism’ and allow themselves to be
driven by the current of events.

“We shall fight, we are fighting against Kornilov, but we do not support
Kerensky; we are uncovering his weaknesses. The distinction is rather
delicate, but highly important and must not be forgotten.

“What does the change of our tactics consist of after the Kornilov
insurrection?

“In this, that we are varying the forms of struggle against Kerensky.
Without diminishing our hostility to him even by one single note,
without taking back one word from what we have said against him, without
giving up the task of overthrowing Kerensky, we say: we must calculate
the moment. We will not overthrow Kerensky at present. We approach the
question of the struggle against him differently: by explaining the
weaknesses and vacillations of Kerensky to the people (who are fighting
against Kornilov).”

We are proposing nothing different. Complete independence of the
Communist organization and press, complete freedom of Communist
criticism, the same for the Social Democracy and the trade unions. Only
contemptible opportunists can allow the freedom of the Communist Party
to be limited (for example, as in the entrance into the Kuomintang). We
are not of their number.

No retraction of our criticism of the Social Democracy. No forgetting of
all that has been. The whole historical reckoning, including the
reckoning for Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg [6], will be presented
at the proper time, just as the Russian Bolsheviks finally presented a
general reckoning to the Mensheviks and Social Revolutionaries for the
baiting, calumny, imprisonment and murder of workers, soldiers, and
peasants.

But we presented our general reckoning to them two months after we had
utilized the partial reckoning between Kerensky and Kornilov, between
the “democrats” and the fascists – in order to drive back the fascists
all the more certainly. Only thanks to this circumstance were we
victorious.

When the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Germany adopts the
position expressed in the quotation from Lenin cited above, the entire
approach to the Social Democratic masses and the trade-union
organizations will change at once: instead of the articles and speeches
which are convincing only to those people who are already convinced
without them, the agitators will find a common language with new
hundreds of thousands and millions of workers. The differentiation
within the Social Democracy will proceed at an increased pace. The
fascists will soon feel that their task does not at all consist merely
of defeating Brüning, Braun, and Wels, but of taking up the open
struggle against the whole working class. On this plane, a profound
differentiation win inevitably be produced within fascism. Only by this
road is victory possible.

But it is necessary to desire this victory. In the meantime, there are
among the Communist officials not a few cowardly careerists and fakers
whose little posts, whose incomes, and more than that, whose hides, are
dear to them. These creatures are very much inclined to spout
ultraradical phrases beneath which is concealed a wretched and
contemptible fatalism. “Without a victory over the Social Democracy, we
cannot battle against fascism!” say such terrible revolutionists, and
for this reason ... they get their passports ready.

Worker-Communists, you are hundreds of thousands, millions; you cannot
leave for anyplace; there are not enough passports for you. Should
fascism come to power, it will ride over your skulls and spines like a
terrific tank. Your salvation lies in merciless struggle. And only a
fighting unity with the Social Democratic workers can bring victory.
Make haste, worker-Communists, you have very little time left!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

_The Rise of Fascism in Germany_ Index

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[return] 

Last updated on: 19.5.2013

Save
