
Leon Trotsky



NOT A WORKERS’ AND NOT A BOURGEOIS STATE? [1]


(November 1937)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Written: November 25, 1937.
Published: FOURTH INTERNATIONAL, Vol. 12 No. 4, July–August 1951,
pp. 123–127.
Transcribed for the _Trotsky Internet Archive_: by Martin Schreader in
1999.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

November 25, 1937

Political Form and Social Content

Comrades Burnham and Carter [2] have placed a fresh question mark over
the class character of the Soviet state. The answer which they give is,
in my opinion, completely erroneous. But inasmuch as these comrades do
not attempt, as do some ultra-leftists, to substitute shrieking for
scientific analysis, we can and should seriously discuss with B. and C.
this exceptionally important question.

B. and C. do not forget that the main difference between the USSR and
the contemporary bourgeois state finds its expression in the powerful
development of the productive forces as a result of a change in the form
of ownership. They further admit that “the economic structure as
established by the October Revolution remains basically unchanged.” They
deduce from this that it is the duty of the Soviet and world proletariat
to defend the USSR from imperialist attacks. In this there is complete
agreement between B. and C. and us. But no matter how great the degree
of our agreement, it by no means covers the whole issue. Though B. and
C. do not solidarize themselves with the ultra-lefts, they nevertheless
consider that the USSR has stopped being a workers’ state “in the
traditional (?) sense given to this term by Marxism.” But since the
“economic structure ... still remains basically unchanged,” the USSR has
not become a bourgeois state. B. and C. at the same time deny – and for
this we can only congratulate them – that the bureaucracy is an
independent class. The result of these inconsistent assertions in the
conclusion, the very one the Stalinists draw, that the Soviet state, in
general, is not an organization of class domination. What, then, is it?

Thus we have a new attempt at revising the class theory of the state. We
are not, it goes without saying, fetishists; should new historical facts
demand a revision of the theory, we would not stop at doing so. But the
lamentable experience of the old revisionists should in any case imbue
us with a salutary caution. We should, ten times over, weigh in our
minds the old theory and the new facts before we attempt to formulate a
new doctrine.

B. and C. themselves remark in passing that in its dependence on
objective and subjective conditions the rule of the proletariat “is able
to express itself in a number of different governmental forms.” For
clarity we will add: either through an open struggle of different
parties within the soviets, or through the monopoly of one party, or
even through a factual concentration of power in the hands of a single
person. Of course personal dictatorship is a symptom of the greatest
danger to the regime. But at the same time, it is, under certain
conditions, the only means by which to save that regime. The class
nature of the state is, consequently, determined not only by its
political forms but by its social content; i.e., by the character of the
forms of property and productive relations which the given state guards
and defends.

In principle B. and C. do not deny this. If they nevertheless refuse to
see in the USSR a workers’ state, it is due to two reasons, one of which
is economic and the other political in character. “During the past
year,” they write, “the bureaucracy has definitively entered the road of
destruction of the planned and nationalized economy.” (Has only “entered
the road”?) Further we read that the course of development “brings the
bureaucracy into ever-increasing and deepening conflict with the needs
and interests of the nationalized economy.” (Only “brings it”?) The
contradiction between the bureaucracy and the economy was observed
before this, but for the past year “the actions of the bureaucracy are
actively sabotaging the plan and disintegrating the state monopoly.”
(Only “disintegrating”? Hence, not yet disintegrated?)

As stated above, the second contention has a political character. “The
concept of the dictatorship of the proletariat is not primarily an
economic but predominantly a political category ... All forms, organs,
and institutions of the class rule of the proletariat are now destroyed,
which is to say that the class rule of the proletariat is now
destroyed.” After hearing about the “different forms” of the proletarian
regime, this second contention, taken by itself, appears unexpected. Of
course, the dictatorship of the proletariat is not only “predominantly”
but wholly and fully a “political category.” However, this very politics
is only concentrated economics. The domination of the Social Democracy
in the state and in the soviets (Germany 1918–19) had nothing in common
with the dictatorship of the proletariat inasmuch as it left bourgeois
property inviolable. But the regime which guards the expropriated and
nationalized property from the imperialists is, independent of political
forms, the dictatorship of the proletariat.

B. and C. “in general,” as it were, admit this. They therefor have
recourse to combining the economic with the political contention. The
bureaucracy, they say, has not only definitively deprived the
proletariat of political power, but has driven the economy into a blind
alley. If in the previous period the bureaucracy with all its
reactionary features played a comparatively progressive role, it has now
definitively become a reactionary factor. In this reasoning there is a
healthy kernel, which is in complete conformity with all former
evaluations and prognoses of the Fourth International. We have more than
once spoken of the fact that “enlightened absolutism” has played a
progressive role in the development of the bourgeoisie only afterward to
become a brake upon this development; the conflict resolved itself, as
is known, in revolution. In laying the groundwork for socialist economy,
we wrote, “enlightened absolutism” can play a progressive role only
during an incomparably shorter period. This prognosis is clearly
confirmed before our very eyes. Deceived by its own successes, the
bureaucracy expected to attain ever bigger coefficients of economic
growth. Meanwhile it ran up against an acute crisis in the economy,
which became one of the sources of its present panic and its mad
repressions. Does this mean that the development of productive forces in
the USSR has already stopped? We would not venture to make such an
assertion. The creative possibilities of nationalized economy are so
great that the productive forces, in spite of the bureaucratic brake put
on them, can develop for a period of years although at a considerably
more moderate rate than heretofore. Along these lines it is scarcely
possible at the moment to make an exact forecast. In any case, the
_political_ crisis which is rending the bureaucracy asunder is
considerably more dangerous for it today than the perspective of a
stoppage of the productive forces. For the sake of simplifying the
question, however, let us grant that the bureaucracy has already become
an absolute brake upon the economic development. But does this fact in
itself mean that the class nature of the USSR has changed or that the
USSR is devoid of any kind of class nature? Here, it seems to me, is the
chief mistake of our comrades.

Up until the First World War bourgeois society developed its productive
forces. Only during the past quarter of a century has the bourgeoisie
become an absolute brake upon economic development. Does this mean that
bourgeois society has ceased being bourgeois? No, it means only that it
has become a _decaying_ bourgeois society. In a number of countries, the
preservation of bourgeois property is possible only through the
establishment of a fascist regime. In other words, the bourgeoisie is
devoid of all forms and means of its own direct political domination,
and must use an intermediary. Does this mean then that the state has
stopped being bourgeois? To the extent that fascism with its barbaric
methods defends private property in the means of production, to that
extent the state remains bourgeois under the fascist rule.

We do not at all intend to give our analogy an all-inclusive meaning.
Nevertheless, it demonstrates that the concentration of power in the
hands of the bureaucracy and even the retardation of the development of
the productive forces, by themselves, still do not change the class
nature of society and its state. Only the intrusion of a revolutionary
or a counterrevolutionary force in property relations can change the
class nature of the state. [A]

But does not history really know of cases of class conflict between the
economy and the state? It does! After the “third estate” seized power,
society for a period of several years still remained feudal. In the
first months of Soviet rule the proletariat reigned on the basis of a
bourgeois economy. In the field of agriculture the dictatorship of the
proletariat operated for a number of years on the basis of a
petty-bourgeois economy (to a considerable degree it does so even now).
Should a bourgeois counterrevolution succeed in the USSR, the new
government for a lengthy period would have to base itself upon the
nationalized economy. But what does such a type of temporary conflict
between the economy and the state mean? It means a _revolution_ or a
_counter-revolution_. The victory of one class over another signifies
that it will reconstruct the economy in the interests of the victors.
But such a dichotomous condition, which is a necessary stage in every
social overturn, has nothing in common with the theory of a classless
state which in the absence of a real boss is being exploited by a clerk,
i.e., by the bureaucracy.
 

Norm and Fact

It is the substitution of a subjective “normative” method in place of an
objective, dialectical approach to the question which renders it
difficult for many comrades to arrive at a correct sociological
appraisal of the USSR. Not without reason do Burnham and Carter say that
the Soviet Union cannot be considered a workers’ state “in the
traditional sense given to this term by Marxism.” This simply means that
the USSR does not correspond to the norms of a workers’ state as set
forth in our program. On this score there can be no disagreement. Our
program has counted upon a progressive development of the workers’ state
and by that token upon its gradual withering away. But history, which
does not always act “according to a program,” has confronted us with the
process of a degenerating workers’ state.

But does this mean that a workers’ state, coming into conflict with the
demands of our program, has ceased thereby to be a workers’ state? A
liver poisoned by malaria does not correspond to a normal type of liver.
But it does not because of that cease to be a liver. For the
understanding of its nature, anatomy and physiology are not sufficient;
pathology too is necessary. Of course it is much easier upon seeing the
diseased liver to say: “This object is not to my liking,” and to turn
one’s back upon it. But a physician cannot permit himself such a luxury.
Depending upon the conditions of the disease itself, and the resulting
deformation of the organ, he must have recourse either to therapeutic
treatment (“reforms”) or to surgery (“revolution”). But to be able to do
this he must first of all understand that the deformed organ is a sick
liver, and not something else.

But let us take a more familiar analogy; that between a workers’ state
and a trade union. From the point of view of our program, the trade
union should be an organization of class struggle. What then should be
our attitude to the American Federation of Labor? [4] At its head stand
manifest agents of the bourgeoisie. Upon all essential questions,
Messrs. Green, Woll, and Company carry out a political line directly
opposed to the interests of the proletariat. We can extend the analogy
and say that if until the appearance of the CIO [5], the AFL
accomplished somewhat progressive work, now that the chief content of
its activity is embodied in a struggle against the more progressive (or
less reactionary) tendencies of the CIO, Green’s apparatus has
definitely become a reactionary factor. This would be completely
correct. But the AFL does not because of this cease to be an
organization of the trade unions.

The class character of the state is determined by its relation to the
forms of property in the means of production. The character of a
workers’ organization such as a trade union is determined by its
relation to the distribution of national income. The fact that Green and
Company defend private property in the means of production characterizes
them as bourgeois. Should these gentlemen in addition defend the income
of the bourgeoisie from attacks on the part of the workers; should they
conduct a struggle against strikes, against the raising of wages,
against help to the unemployed; then we would have an organization of
scabs, and not a trade union. However, Green and Company, in order not
to lose their base, must within certain limits lead the struggle of the
workers for an increase – or at least against a diminution – of their
share of the national income. This objective symptom is sufficient in
all important cases to permit us to draw a line of demarcation between
the most reactionary trade union and an organization of scabs. Thus we
are duty bound not only to carry on work in the AFL, but to defend it
from scabs, the Ku Klux Klan, and the like.

The function of Stalin, like the function of Green, has a dual
character. Stalin serves the bureaucracy and thus the world bourgeoisie;
but he cannot serve the bureaucracy without defending that social
foundation which the bureaucracy exploits in its own interests. To that
extent does Stalin defend nationalized property from imperialist attacks
and from the too impatient and avaricious layers of the bureaucracy
itself. However, the carries through this defend with methods that
prepare the general destruction of Soviet society. It is exactly because
of this that the Stalinist clique must be overthrown. The proletariat
cannot subcontract this work to the imperialists. In spite of Stalin,
the proletariat defends the USSR from imperialist attacks.

Historical development has accustomed us to the most varied kind of
trade unions: militant, reformist, revolutionary, reactionary, liberal
and Catholic. It is otherwise with a workers’ state. Such a phenomenon
we see for the first time. That accounts for our inclination to approach
the USSR exclusively from the point of view of the _norms_ of the
revolutionary program. Meanwhile the workers’ state is an objective
historical _fact_ which is being subjected to the influence of different
historical forces and can as we see come into full contradiction with
“traditional” norms.

Comrades B. and C. are completely correct when they say that Stalin and
Company by their politics serve the international bourgeoisie. But this
correct thought must be established in the correct conditions of time
and place. Hitler also serves the bourgeoisie. However, between the
functions of Stalin and Hitler there is a difference. Hitler defends the
bourgeois forms of property. Stalin adapts the interests of the
bureaucracy to the proletarian forms of property. The same Stalin in
Spain, i.e., on the soil of a bourgeois regime, executes the function of
Hitler (in their political methods they generally differ little from one
another). The juxtaposition of the different social roles of the one and
the same Stalin in the USSR and in Spain demonstrates equally well that
the bureaucracy is not an independent class but the tool of classes; and
that it is impossible to define the social nature of a state by the
virtue or villainy of the bureaucracy.

The assertion that the bureaucracy of a workers’ state has a bourgeois
character must appear not only unintelligible but completely senseless
to people stamped with a formal cast of mind. However, chemically pure
types of state never existed, and do not exist in general. The
semifeudal Prussian monarchy executed the most important tasks of the
bourgeoisie, but executed them in its own manner, i.e., in a feudal, not
a Jacobin style. In Japan we observe even today an analogous correlation
between the bourgeois character of the state and the semifeudal
character of the ruling caste. But all this does not hinder us from
clearly differentiating between a feudal and a bourgeois society. True,
one can raise the objection that the collaboration of feudal and
bourgeois forces is immeasurably more easily realized than the
collaboration of bourgeois and proletarian forces, inasmuch as the first
instance presents a case of two forms of class exploitation. This is
completely correct. But a workers’ state does not create a new society
in one day. Marx wrote that in the first period of a workers’ state the
bourgeois norms of distribution are still preserved. (About this see THE
REVOLUTION BETRAYED, the section _Socialism and the State_, p.53.) One
has to weigh well and think this thought out to the end. The workers’
state itself, as a _state_, is necessary exactly because the bourgeois
norms of distribution still remain in force.

This means that even the most revolutionary bureaucracy is to a certain
degree a _bourgeois organ_ in the workers’ state. Of course, the
_degree_ of this bourgeoisification and the general tendency of
development bears decisive significance. If the workers’ state loses its
bureaucratization and gradually falls away, this means that its
development marches along the road to socialism. On the contrary, if the
bureaucracy becomes ever more powerful, authoritative, privileged, and
conservative, this means that in the workers’ state the bourgeois
tendencies grow at the expense of the socialist; in other words, that
inner contradiction which _to a certain degree_ is lodged in the
workers’ state from the first days of its rise does not diminish, as the
“norm” demands, but increases. However, so long as that contradiction
has not passed from the sphere of distribution into the sphere of
production, and has not blown up nationalized property and planned
economy, the state remains a workers’ state.

Lenin had already said fifteen years ago: “Our state is a workers’
state, but with bureaucratic deformations.” In that period bureaucratic
deformation represented a direct inheritance of the bourgeois regime
and, in that sense, appeared as a mere survival of the past. Under the
pressure of unfavorable historical conditions, however, the bureaucratic
“survival” received new sources of nourishment and became a tremendous
historical factor. It is exactly because of this that we now speak of
the _degeneration_ of the workers’ state. This degeneration, as the
present orgy of Bonapartist terror shows, has approached a crucial
point. That which was a “bureaucratic deformation” is at the present
moment preparing to devour the workers’ state, without leaving any
remains, and on the ruins of nationalized property to spawn a new
propertied class. Such a possibility has drawn extremely near. But all
this is only a possibility and we do not intend beforehand to bow before
it.

The USSR as a workers’ state does not correspond to the “traditional”
norm. This does not signify that it is not a workers’ state. Neither
does this signify that the norm has been found false. The “norm” counted
upon the complete victory of the international proletarian revolution.
The USSR is only a partial and mutilated expression of a backward and
isolated workers’ state.

Idealistic, ultimatistic, “purely” normative thinking wishes to
construct the world in its own image, and simply turns away from
phenomena which are not to its liking. Sectarians, i.e., people who are
revolutionary only in their own imagination, guide themselves by empty
idealistic norms. They say: “These unions are not to our liking, we will
not join them; this workers’ state is not to our liking, we will not
defend it.” Each time they promise to begin history anew. They will
construct, don’t you see, an ideal workers’ state, when God places in
their hands an ideal party and ideal unions. But until this happy moment
arrives, they will, as much as possible, pout their lips at reality. A
very big pout – that is the supreme expression of sectarian
“revolutionaryism.”

Purely “historical,” reformist, Menshevik, passive, conservative
thinking busies itself with justifying, as Marx expressed it, today’s
swinishness by yesterday’s swinishness. Representatives of this kind
enter into mass organizations and dissolve themselves there. The
contemptible “friends” of the USSR adapt themselves to the vileness of
the bureaucracy, invoking the “historical” conditions.

In opposition to these two casts of mind, dialectical thinking –
Marxist, Bolshevik – takes phenomena in their objective development and
at the same time finds in the internal contradictions of this
development at a basis for the realization of its “norms.” It is of
course necessary not to forget that we expect the programmatic norms to
be realized only if they are the generalized expression of the
progressive tendencies of _the objective historical process itself_.

The programmatic definition of a union would sound approximately like
this: an organization of workers of a trade or industry with the
objective of (1) struggling against capitalism for the amelioration of
the workers, (2) participating in the revolutionary struggle for the
overthrow of the bourgeoisie, (3) participating in the organization of
economy on a socialist basis. If we compared this “normative” definition
with the actual reality, we should find ourselves constrained to say:
there does not exist a single trade union in the world today. But such a
counterposing of norm to fact, that is to say, of the _generalized_
expression of the development to the _particular_ manifestation of this
same development – such a formal, ultimatistic, nondialectical
counterposing of program to reality is absolutely lifeless and does not
open any road for the intervention of the revolutionary party. In the
meantime the existing opportunistic unions, under the pressure of
capitalist disintegration, _can_ – and given correct policies on our
part in the unions _must_ – approach our programmatic norms and play a
progressive historical role. This, of course, presupposes a complete
change of leadership. It is necessary that the workers of the United
States, England, France, drive out Green, Citrine, Jouhaux and Company.
[6] It is necessary that the Soviet workers drive out Stalin and
Company. If the proletariat drives out the Soviet bureaucracy in time,
then it will still find the nationalized means of production and the
basic elements of the planned economy after its victory. This means that
it will not have to begin from the beginning. That is a tremendous
advantage! Only radical dandies, who are used to hopping carelessly from
twig to twig, can lightmindedly dismiss such a possibility. The
socialist revolution is too tremendous and difficult a problem for one
to lightmindedly wave one’s hand at its inestimable material advancement
and begin from the beginning.

It is very good that Comrades B. and C., in distinction from our French
comrade Craipeau and others, do not forget the factor of the productive
forces and do not deny defense of the Soviet Union. But this is
completely inefficient. And what if the criminal leadership of the
bureaucracy should paralyze growth in the economy? Can it be possible
the Comrades B. and C. in such a case will passively allow imperialism
to destroy the social bases of the USSR? We are sure this is not the
case. However, their non-Marxist definition of the USSR as neither a
workers’ not a bourgeois state opens the door for _all kinds_ of
conclusions. That is why this definition must be categorically rejected.
 

Simultaneously a Ruling and an Oppressed Class

“How can our political conscience not resent the fact,” say the
ultra-leftists, “that they want to force us to believe that in the USSR,
under Stalin’s rule, the proletariat is the ‘ruling class’ ...?!” This
assertion phrased in such an abstract manner can actually arouse our
“resentment.” But the truth is that abstract categories, necessary in
the process of analysis, are completely unfit for synthesis, which
demands the utmost concreteness. The proletariat of the USSR is the
ruling class in a backward country where there is still a lack of the
most vital necessities of life. The proletariat of the USSR rules in a
land consisting of only one-twelfth part of humanity; imperialism rules
over the remaining eleven-twelfths. The rule of the proletariat, already
maimed by the backwardness and poverty of the country, is doubly and
triply deformed under the pressure of world imperialism. The organ of
the rule of the proletariat – the state – becomes an organ for pressure
from imperialism (diplomacy, army, foreign trade, ideas, and customs).
The struggle for domination, considered on a historical scale, is not
between the proletariat and the bureaucracy, but between the proletariat
and the world bourgeoisie. The bureaucracy is only the transmitting
mechanism in this struggle. The struggle is not concluded. In spite of
all the efforts on the part of the Moscow clique to demonstrate its
conservative reliability (the counterrevolutionary politics of Stalin in
Spain!), world imperialism does not trust Stalin, does not spare him the
mist humiliating flicks and is ready at the first favorable opportunity
to overthrow him. Hitler – and therein lies his strength – simply more
consistently and frankly expresses the attitude of the world bourgeoisie
to the Soviet bureaucracy. For the bourgeoisie – fascist as well as
democratic – isolated counter-revolutionary exploits of Stalin do not
suffice; it needs a complete counter-revolution in the relations of
property and the opening of the Russian market. So long as this is not
the case, the bourgeoisie considers the Soviet state hostile to it. And
it is right.

The internal regime in the colonial and semicolonial countries has a
predominantly bourgeois character. But the pressure of foreign
imperialism so alters and distorts the economic and political structure
of these countries that the national bourgeoisie (even in the
politically independent countries of South America) only partly reaches
the height of a ruling class. The pressure imperialism on backward
countries does not, it is true, change their _basic_ social character
since the oppressor and oppressed represent only different levels of
development in one and the same bourgeois society. Nevertheless the
difference between England and India, Japan and China, the United States
and Mexico is so big that we strictly differentiate between oppressor
and oppressed bourgeois countries and we consider it our duty to support
the latter against the former. The bourgeoisie of colonial and
semi-colonial countries is a semi-ruling, semi-oppressed class.

The pressure of imperialism on the Soviet Union has as its aim the
alteration of the very nature of Soviet society. The struggle – today
peaceful, tomorrow military – concerns the forms of property. In its
capacity of a transmitting mechanism in this struggle, the bureaucracy
leans now on the proletariat against imperialism, now on imperialism
against the proletariat, in order to increase its own power. At the same
time it mercilessly exploits its role as distributor of the meager
necessities of life in order to safeguard its own well-being and power.
By this token the rule of the proletariat assumes an abridged, curbed,
distorted character. One can with full justification say that the
proletariat, _ruling_ in one backward and isolated country, still
remains an _oppressed_ class. The source of oppression is world
imperialism; the mechanism of transmission of the oppression – the
bureaucracy. If in the words “a ruling and at the same time an oppressed
class” there is a contradiction, then it flows not from the mistakes of
thought but from the contradiction in the very situation in the USSR. It
is precisely because of this that we reject the theory of socialism in
one country.

The recognition of the USSR as a workers’ state – not a type but a
mutilation of a type – does not at all signify a theoretical and
political amnesty for the Soviet bureaucracy. On the contrary, its
reactionary character is fully revealed only in the light of the
contradiction between its antiproletarian politics and the needs of the
workers’ state. Only by posing the question in this manner does our
exposure of the crimes of the Stalinist clique gain full motive force.
The defense of the USSR means not only the supreme struggle against
imperialism, but a preparation for the overthrow of the Bonapartist
bureaucracy.

The experience of the USSR shows how great are the possibilities lodged
in the workers’ state and how great is its strength of resistance. But
this experience also shows how powerful is the pressure of capitalism
and its bureaucratic agency, how difficult it is for the proletariat to
gain full liberation, and how necessary it is to educate and temper the
new International in the spirit of irreconcilable revolutionary
struggle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Footnote

A. The London NEW LEADER, under the editorship of Fenner Brockway,
writes in an editorial, dated November 12 of this year: “The Independent
Labour Party does not accept the Trotskyist view that the economic
foundations of socialism in Soviet Russia have been destroyed.” [3] What
can one say about these people? They do not understand the thoughts of
others because they do not have any of their own. They can only sow
confusion in the minds of the workers. – _L.T._

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Endnotes

1. _Not a Workers’ and Not a Bourgeois State?_, INTERNAL BULLETIN
(OCSPC), No. 3, December 1937. This was a contribution by Trotsky to the
internal discussion that preceded the founding convention of the
Socialist Workers’ Party. INTERNAL BULLETIN, No. 2, November 1937, had
published a draft resolution on the Soviet Union by the Convention
Arrangements Committee, and a longer amendment by Burnham and Carter,
which Trotsky analyzes here. (INTERNAL BULLETIN, No. 3, December 1937,
was to contain Burnham and Carter’s answers to Trotsky.)

2. _James Burnham_ and _Joseph Carter_ were leaders of the
Bolshevik-Leninist faction of the Socialist Party left wing and later of
the SWP. In the pre-convention discussion they represented a tendency in
the leadership that sought to change the party’s characterization of the
Soviet Union as a workers’ state, but insisted that they continued to
support the defense of the USSR against imperialist attack. In addition,
they were beginning to express apprehensions about the centralist
aspects of Bolshevik organizational policy. At the SWP convention their
resolution on the USSR received the votes of three delegates against
sixty-nine for the majority resolution. The Burnham-Carter resolution on
the organization question was withdrawn when the majority agreed to
minor amendments in its resolution. In 1940 Burnham and Carter, this
time joined by Shachtman and Abern, broke with the SWP over the class
nature of the Soviet state. Burnham soon withdrew from the Shachtmanite
Workers’ Party, and later became a propagandist for McCarthyism and
other ultra-right movements and an editor of the right-wing NATIONAL
REVIEW.

3. The NEW LEADER was the paper of the British _Independent Labour
Party_. The ILP was founded in 1893 and helped to found the Labour
Party, left it in 1931, and was now associated with the centrist London
Bureau. It returned to the Labour Party in 1939. _Fenner Brockway_
(1890–1979) was an opponent of the Fourth International and secretary of
the London Bureau. He was also a leader of the ILP.

4. The _American Federation of Labor_ (AFL) was a conservative craft
union federation, whose president was _William Green_ (1873–1952) and
one of whose vice presidents was _Matthew Woll_ (1880–1956).

5. The _Congress of Industrial Organizations_ (CIO) was originally set
up in 1935 as a committee within the AFL. The AFL leaders refused to
respond to the demand for power new organizations to represent
radicalizing workers on an industry-wide basis, and expelled the CIO
unions in 1938, forcing them to establish their own national
organization. The AFL and CIO merged in 1955.

6. _Sir Walter Citrine_ (1887–1976) was the general secretary of the
British Trades Union Congress from 1926 to 1946. He was knighted for his
service to British capitalism in 1935, and was made a baronet in 1946.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[return] 

Last updated on: 21 November 2014

Save
