Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung



THE CHINESE REVOLUTION AND THE CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY


_December 1939_

[_The Chinese Revolution and the Chinese Communist Party_ is a textbook
which was written jointly by Comrade Mao Tse-tung and several other
comrades in Yenan to the winter of 1939. The first chapter, "Chinese
Society", was drafted by other comrades and revised by Comrade Mao
Tse-tung. The second chapter, "The Chinese Revolution", was written by
Comrade Mao Tse-tung himself. Another chapter, scheduled to deal with
"Party Building", was left unfinished by the comrades working on it. The
two published chapters, and especially Chapter II, have played a great
educational role in the Chinese Communist Party and among the Chinese
people. The views on New Democracy set out by Comrade Mao Tse-tung in
Chapter II were considerably developed in his "On New Democracy",
written in January 1940.]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

_CHAPTER I_

CHINESE SOCIETY

1. THE CHINESE NATION

China is one of the largest countries in the world, her territory being
about the size of the whole of Europe. In this vast country of ours
there are large areas of fertile land which provide us with food and
clothing; mountain ranges across its length and breadth with extensive
forests and rich mineral deposits; many rivers and lakes which provide
us with water transport and irrigation; and a long coastline which
facilitates communication with nations beyond the seas. From ancient
times our forefathers have laboured, lived and multiplied on this vast
territory.

China borders on the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in the
northeast, the northwest and part of the west; the Mongolian People's
Republic in the north; Afghanistan, India, Bhutan and Nepal in the
southwest and part of the west; Burma and Indo-China in the south; and
Korea in the east, where she is also a close neighbor of Japan and the
Philippines. China's geographical setting has its advantages and
disadvantages for the Chinese people's revolution. It is an advantage to
be adjacent to the Soviet Union and fairly distant from the major
imperialist countries in Europe and America, and to have many colonial
or semi-colonial countries around us. It is a disadvantage that Japanese
imperialism, making use of its geographical proximity, is constantly
threatening the very existence of all China's nationalities and the
Chinese people's revolution.

China has a population of 450 million, or almost a quarter of the world
total. Over nine-tenths of her inhabitants belong to the Han
nationality. There are also scores of minority nationalities, including
the Mongol, Hui, Tibetan, Uighur, Miao, Yi, Chuang, Chungchia and Korean
nationalities, all with long histories though at different levels of
cultural development. Thus China is a country with a very large
population composed of many nationalities.

Developing along the same lines as many other nations of the world, the
Chinese people (here we refer mainly to the Hans) went through many
thousands of years of life in classless primitive communes. Some 4,000
years have gone by since the collapse of these primitive communes and
the transition to class society, which took the form first of slave and
then of feudal society. Throughout the history of Chinese civilization
its agriculture and handicrafts have been renowned for their high level
of development; there have been many great thinkers, scientists,
inventors, statesmen, soldiers, men of letters and artists, and we have
a rich store of classical works. The compass was invented in China very
long ago.[1] The art of paper-making was discovered as early as 1,800
years ago.[2] Block-printing was invented 1,300 years ago,[3] and
movable type 800 years ago.[4] The use of gunpowder was known to the
Chinese before the Europeans.[5] Thus China has one of the oldest
civilizations in the world; she has a recorded history of nearly 4,000
years.

The Chinese nation is known throughout the world not only for its
industriousness and stamina, but also for its ardent love of freedom and
its rich revolutionary traditions. The history of the Han people, for
instance, demonstrates that the Chinese never submit to tyrannical rule
but invariably use revolutionary means to overthrow or change it. In the
thousands of years of Han history, there have been hundreds of peasant
uprisings, great and small, against the dark rule of the landlords and
the nobility. And most dynastic changes came about as a result of such
peasant uprisings. All the nationalities of China have resisted foreign
oppression and have invariably resorted to rebellion to shake it off.
They favour a union on the basis of equality but are against the
oppression of one nationality by another. During the thousands of years
of recorded history, the Chinese nation has given birth to many national
heroes and revolutionary leaders. Thus the Chinese nation has a glorious
revolutionary tradition and a splendid historical heritage.

2. THE OLD FEUDAL SOCIETY

Although China is a great nation and although she is a vast country with
an immense population, a long history, a rich revolutionary tradition
and a splendid historical heritage, her economic, political and cultural
development was sluggish for a long time after the transition from slave
to feudal society. This feudal society, beginning with the Chou and Chin
Dynasties, lasted about 3,000 years.

The main features of the economic and political system of China's feudal
era were as follows:

(1) A self-sufficient natural economy predominated. The peasants
produced for themselves not only agricultural products but most of the
handicraft articles they needed. What the landlords and the nobility
exacted from them in the form of land rent was also chiefly for private
enjoyment and not for exchange. Although exchange developed as time went
on, it did not play a decisive role in the economy as a whole.

(2) The feudal ruling class composed of landlords, the nobility and the
emperor owned most of the land, while the peasants had very little or
none at all. The peasants tilled the land of the landlords, the nobility
and the royal family with their own farm implements and had to turn over
to them for their private enjoyment 40, 50, 60, 70, or even 80 per cent
or more of the crop. In effect the peasants were still serfs.

(3) Not only did the landlords, the nobility and the royal family live
on rent extorted from the peasants, but the landlord state also exacted
tribute, taxes and _corvee_ services from them to support a horde of
government officials and an army which was used mainly for their
repression.

(4) The feudal landlord state was the organ of power protecting this
system of feudal exploitation. While the feudal state was torn apart
into rival principalities in the period before the Chin Dynasty, it
became autocratic and centralized after the first Chin emperor unified
China, though some feudal separatism remained. The emperor reigned
supreme in the feudal state, appointing officials in charge of the armed
forces, the law courts, the treasury and state granaries in all parts of
the county and relying on the landed gentry as the mainstay of the
entire system of feudal rule.

It was under such feudal economic exploitation and political oppression
that the Chinese peasants lived like slaves, in poverty and suffering,
through the ages. Under the bondage of feudalism they had no freedom of
person. The landlord had the right to beat, abuse or even kill them at
will, and they had no political rights whatsoever. The extreme poverty
and backwardness of the peasants resulting from ruthless landlord
exploitation and oppression is the basic reason why Chinese society
remained at the same stage of socio-economic development for several
thousand years.

The principal contradiction in feudal society was between the peasantry
and the landlord class.

The peasants and the handicraft workers were the basic classes which
created the wealth and culture of this society.

The ruthless economic exploitation and political oppression of the
Chinese peasants forced them into numerous uprisings against landlord
rule. There were hundreds of uprisings, great and small, all of them
peasant revolts or peasant revolutionary wars--from the uprisings of
Chen Sheng, Wu Kuang, Hsiang Yu and Liu Pang [6] in the Chin Dynasty,
those of Hsinshih, Pinglin, the Red Eyebrows, the Bronze Horses [7] and
the Yellow Turbans [8] in the Han Dynasty, those of Li Mi and Tou
Chien-the [9] in the Sui Dynasty, those of Wang Hsienchih and Huang Chao
[10] in the Tang Dynasty, those of Sung Chiang and Fang La [11] in the
Sung Dynasty, that of Chu Yuan-chang [12] the Yuan Dynasty, and that of
Li Tzu-cheng [13] in the Ming Dynasty, down to the uprising known as the
War of the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom in the Ching Dynasty. The scale of
peasant uprisings and peasant wars in Chinese history has no parallel
anywhere else. The class struggles of the peasants, the peasant
uprisings and peasant wars constituted the real motive force of
historical development in Chinese feudal society. For each of the major
peasant uprisings and wars dealt a blow to the feudal regime of the
time, and hence more or less furthered the growth of the social
productive forces. However, since neither new productive forces, nor new
relations of production, nor new class forces, nor any advanced
political party existed in those days, the peasant uprisings and wars
did not have correct leadership such as the proletariat and the
Communist Party provide today; every peasant revolution failed, and the
peasantry was invariably used by the landlords and the nobility, either
during or after the revolution, as a lever for bringing about dynastic
change. Therefore' although some social progress was made after each
great peasant revolutionary struggle, the feudal economic relations and
political system remained basically unchanged.

It is only in the last hundred years that a change of a different order
has taken place.

3. PRESENT-DAY COLONIAL, SEMI-COLONIAL AND SEMI-FEUDAL SOCIETY

As explained above, Chinese society remained feudal for 3,000 years. But
is it still completely feudal today? No, China has changed. After the
Opium War of 1840 China gradually changed into a semi-colonial and
semi-feudal society. Since the Incident of September 18 1931, when the
Japanese imperialists started their armed aggression, China has changed
further into a colonial, semi-colonial and semi-feudal society. We shall
now describe the course of this change.

As discussed in Section 2, Chinese feudal society lasted for about 3,000
years. It was not until the middle of the 19th century, with the
penetration of foreign capitalism, that great changes took place in
Chinese society.

As China's feudal society had developed a commodity economy, and so
carried within itself the seeds of capitalism, China would of herself
have developed slowly into a capitalist society even without the impact
of foreign capitalism. Penetration by foreign capitalism accelerated
this process. Foreign capitalism played an important part in the
disintegration of China's social economy, on the one hand it undermined
the foundations of her self-sufficient natural economy and wrecked the
handicraft industries both in the cities and in the peasants' homes, and
on the other, it hastened the growth of a commodity economy in town and
country.

Apart from its disintegrating effects on the foundations of China's
feudal economy, this state of affairs gave rise to certain objective
conditions and possibilities for the development of capitalist
production in China. For the destruction of the natural economy created
a commodity market for capitalism, while the bankruptcy of large numbers
of peasants and handicraftsmen provided it with a labour market

In fact, some merchants, landlords and bureaucrats began investing in
modern industry as far back as sixty years ago, in the latter part of
the 19^(th) century, under the stimulus of foreign capitalism and
because of certain cracks in the feudal economic structure. About forty
years ago, at the turn of the century, China's national capitalism took
its first steps forward. Then about twenty years ago, during the first
imperialist world war, China's national industry expanded, chiefly in
textiles and flour milling, because the imperialist countries in Europe
and America were preoccupied with the war and temporarily relaxed their
oppression of China.

The history of the emergence and development of national capitalism is
at the same time the history of the emergence and development of the
Chinese bourgeoisie and proletariat. Just as a section of the merchants,
landlords and bureaucrats were precursors of the Chinese bourgeoisie, so
a section of the peasants and handicraft workers were the precursors of
the Chinese proletariat. As distinct social classes, the Chinese
bourgeoisie and proletariat are new-born and never existed before in
Chinese history. They have evolved into new social classes from the womb
of feudal society. They are twins born of China's old (feudal) society,
at once linked to each other and antagonistic to each other. However,
the Chinese proletariat emerged and grew simultaneously not only with
the Chinese national bourgeoisie but also with the enterprises directly
operated by the imperialists in China. Hence, a very large section of
the Chinese proletariat is older and more experienced than the Chinese
bourgeoisie, and is therefore a greater and more broadly based social
force.

However, the emergence and development of capitalism is only one aspect
of the change that has taken place since the imperialist penetration of
China. There is another concomitant and obstructive aspect, namely, the
collusion of imperialism with the Chinese feudal forces to arrest the
development of Chinese capitalism.

It is certainly not the purpose of the imperialist powers invading China
to transform feudal China into capitalist China. On the contrary, their
purpose is to transform China into their own semi-colony or colony.

To this end the imperialist powers have used and continue to use
military, political, economic and cultural means of oppression, so that
China has gradually become a semi-colony and colony. They are as
follows:

(1) The imperialist powers have waged many wars of aggression against
China, for instance, the Opium War launched by Britain in 1840, the war
launched by the Anglo-French allied forces in 1857,[14] the Sino-French
War of 1884,[15] the Sino-Japanese War of 1894, and the war launched by
the allied forces of the eight powers in 1900.[16] After defeating China
in war, they not only occupied many neighbouring countries formerly
under her protection, but seized or "leased" parts of her territory. For
instance, Japan occupied Taiwan and the Penghu Islands and "leased" the
port of Lushun, Britain seized Hongkong and France "leased"
Kwangchowwan. In addition to annexing territory, they exacted huge
indemnities. Thus heavy blows were struck at China's huge feudal empire.

(2) The imperialist powers have forced China to sign numerous unequal
treaties by which they have acquired the right to station land and sea
forces and exercise consular jurisdiction in China, [17] and they have
carved up the whole country into imperialist spheres of influence. [18]

(3) The imperialist powers have gained control of all the important
trading ports in China by these unequal treaties and have marked off
areas in many of these ports as concessions under their direct
administration.[19] They have also gained control of China's customs,
foreign trade and communications (sea, land, inland water and air). Thus
they have been able to dump their goods in China, turn her into a market
for their industrial products, and at the same time subordinate her
agriculture to their imperialist needs.

(4) The imperialist powers operate many enterprises in both light and
heavy industry in China in order to utilize her raw materials and cheap
labour on the spot, and they thereby directly exert economic pressure on
China's national industry and obstruct the development of her productive
forces.

(5) The imperialist powers monopolize China's banking and finance by
extending loans to the Chinese government and establishing banks in
China. Thus they have not only overwhelmed China's national capitalism
in commodity competition, they have also secured a stranglehold on her
banking and finance.

(6) The imperialist powers have established a network of comprador and
merchant-usurer exploitation right across China, from the trading ports
to the remote hinterland, and have created a comprador and
merchant-usurer class in their service, so as to facilitate their
exploitation of the masses of the Chinese peasantry and other sections
of the people.

(7) The imperialist powers have made the feudal landlord class as well
as the comprador class the main props of their rule in China.
Imperialism "first allies itself with the ruling strata of the previous
social structure, with the feudal lords and the trading and
money-lending bourgeoisie, against the majority of the people.
Everywhere imperialism attempts to preserve and to perpetuate all those
pre-capitalist forms of exploitation (especially in the villages) which
serve as the basis for the existence of its reactionary allies".[20]
"Imperialism, with all its financial and military might, is the force in
China that supports, inspires, fosters and preserves the feudal
survivals, together with their entire bureaucratic-militarist
superstructure." [21]

(8) The imperialist powers supply the reactionary government with large
quantities of munitions and a host of military advisers, in order to
keep the warlords fighting among themselves and to suppress the Chinese
people.

(9) Furthermore, the imperialist powers have never slackened their
efforts to poison the minds of the Chinese people. This is their policy
of cultural aggression. And it is carried out through missionary work,
through establishing hospitals and schools, publishing newspapers and
inducing Chinese students to study abroad. Their aim is to train
intellectuals who will serve their interests and to dupe the people.

(10) Since September 18, 1931, the large-scale invasion of Japanese
imperialism has turned a big chunk of semi-colonial China into a
Japanese colony.

These facts represent the other aspect of the change that has taken
place since the imperialist penetration of China--the blood-stained
picture of feudal China being reduced to semi-feudal, semi-colonial and
colonial China.

It is thus clear that in their aggression against China the imperialist
powers have on the one hand hastened the disintegration of feudal
society and the growth of elements of capitalism, thereby transforming a
feudal into a semi-feudal society, and on the other imposed their
ruthless rule on China, reducing an independent country to a
semi-colonial and colonial country.

Taking both these aspects together, we can see that China's colonial,
semi-colonial and semi-feudal society possesses the following
characteristics:

(1) The foundations of the self-sufficient natural economy of feudal
times have been destroyed, but the exploitation of the peasantry by the
landlord class, which is the basis of the system of feudal exploitation,
not only remains intact but, linked as it is with exploitation by
comprador and usurer capital, clearly dominates China's social and
economic life.

(2) National capitalism has developed to a certain extent and has played
a considerable part in China's political and cultural life but it has
not become the principal pattern in China's social economy, it is flabby
and is mostly associated with foreign imperialism and domestic feudalism
in varying degrees.

(3) The autocratic rule of the emperors and nobility has been
overthrown, and in its place there have arisen first the
warlord-bureaucrat rule of the landlord class and then the joint
dictatorship of the landlord class and the big bourgeoisie. In the
occupied areas there is the rule of Japanese imperialism and its
puppets.

(4) Imperialism controls not only China's vital financial and economic
arteries but also her political and military power. In the occupied
areas everything is in the hands of Japanese imperialism.

(5) China's economic, political and cultural development is very uneven,
because she has been under the complete or partial domination of many
imperialist powers, because she has actually been in a state of disunity
for a long time, and because her territory is immense.

(6) Under the twofold oppression of imperialism and feudalism and
especially as a result of the large-scale invasion of Japanese
imperialism, the Chinese people, and particularly the peasants, have
become more and more impoverished and have even been pauperized in large
numbers, living in hunger and cold and without any political rights. The
poverty and lack of freedom among the Chinese people are on a scale
seldom found elsewhere.

Such are the characteristics of China's colonial, semi-colonial and
semi-feudal society.

This situation has in the main been determined by the Japanese and other
imperialist forces; it is the result of the collusion of foreign
imperialism and domestic feudalism.

The contradiction between imperialism and the Chinese nation and the
contradiction between feudalism and the great masses of the people are
the basic contradictions in modern Chinese society. Of course, there are
others, such as the contradiction between the bourgeoisie and the
proletariat and the contradictions within the reactionary ruling classes
themselves. But the contradiction between imperialism and the Chinese
nation is the principal one. These contradictions and their
intensification must inevitably result in the incessant growth of
revolutionary movements. The great revolutions in modern and
contemporary China have emerged and grown on the basis of these basic
contradictions.

_CHAPTER II_

THE CHINESE REVOLUTION

1. THE REVOLUTIONARY MOVEMENTS IN THE LAST HUNDRED YEARS

The history of China's transformation into a semi-colony and colony by
imperialism in collusion with Chinese feudalism is at the same time a
history of struggle by the Chinese people against imperialism and its
lackeys. The Opium War, the Movement of the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom,
the Sino-French War, the Sino-Japanese War, the Reform Movement of 1898,
the Yi Ho Tuan Movement, the Revolution of 1911, the May 4th Movement,
the May 30th Movement, the Northern Expedition, the Agrarian
Revolutionary War and the present War of Resistance Against Japan--all
testify to the Chinese people's indomitable spirit in fighting
imperialism and its lackeys.

Thanks to the Chinese people's unrelenting and heroic struggle during
the last hundred years, imperialism has not been able to subjugate
China, nor will it ever be able to do so.

The valiant Chinese people will certainly fight on, even though Japanese
imperialism is now exerting its full strength in an all-out offensive
and many landlord and big bourgeois elements, such as the overt and
covert Wang Ching-weis, have already capitulated to the enemy or are
preparing to do so. This heroic struggle will not cease until the
Chinese people have driven Japanese imperialism out of China and
achieved the complete liberation of the country.

The national revolutionary struggle of the Chinese people has a history
of fully one hundred years counting from the Opium War of 1840, or of
thirty years counting from the Revolution of 1911. It has not yet run
its full course, nor has it yet performed its tasks with any signal
success; therefore the Chinese people, and above all the Communist
Party, must shoulder the responsibility of resolutely fighting on

What are the targets of the revolution? What are its tasks? What are its
motive forces? What is its character? And what are its perspectives?
These are the questions we shall now deal with.

2. THE TARGETS OF THE CHINESE REVOLUTON

From our analysis in the third section of Chapter I, we know that
present-day Chinese society is a colonial, semi-colonial and semi-feudal
society. Only when we grasp the nature of Chinese society will we be
able clearly to understand the targets, tasks, motive forces and
character of the Chinese revolution and its perspectives and future
transition. A clear understanding of the nature of Chinese society, that
is_,_ of Chinese conditions, is therefore the key to a clear
understanding of all the problems of the revolution.

Since the nature of present-day Chinese society is colonial,
semi-colonial and semi-feudal, what are the chief targets or enemies at
this stage of the Chinese revolution?

They are imperialism and feudalism, the bourgeoisie of the imperialist
countries and the landlord class of our country. For it is these two
that are the chief oppressors, the chief obstacles to the progress of
Chinese society at the present stage. The two collude with each other in
oppressing the Chinese people, and imperialism is the foremost and most
ferocious enemy of the Chinese people, because national oppression by
imperialism is the more onerous.

Since Japan's armed invasion of China, the principal enemy of the
revolution has been Japanese imperialism together with all the Chinese
traitors and reactionaries in league with it, whether they have
capitulated openly or are preparing to do so.

The Chinese bourgeoisie, which is also a victim of imperialist
oppression, once led or played a principal role in revolutionary
struggles such as the Revolution of 1911, and has participated in
revolutionary struggles such as the Northern Expedition and the present
War of Resistance Against Japan. In the long period from 1927 to 1937,
however, its upper stratum, namely, the section represented by the
reactionary clique within the Kuomintang, collaborated with imperialism,
formed a reactionary alliance with the landlord class, betrayed the
friends who had helped it--the Communist Party, the proletariat, the
peasantry and other sections of the petty bourgeoisie--betrayed the
Chinese revolution and brought about its defeat. At that time therefore,
the revolutionary people and the revolutionary political party (the
Communist Party) could not but regard these bourgeois elements as one of
the targets of the revolution. In the War of Resistance a section of the
big landlord class and big bourgeoisie, represented by Wang Ching-wei,
has turned traitor and deserted to the enemy. Consequently, the
anti-Japanese people cannot but regard these big bourgeois elements who
have betrayed our national interests as one of the targets of the
revolution.

It is evident, then, that the enemies of the Chinese revolution are very
powerful. They include not only powerful imperialists and powerful
feudal forces, but also, at times, the bourgeois reactionaries who
collaborate with the imperialist and feudal forces to oppose the people.
Therefore, it is wrong to underestimate the strength of the enemies of
the revolutionary Chinese people.

In the face of such enemies, the Chinese revolution cannot be other than
protracted and ruthless. With such powerful enemies, the revolutionary
forces cannot be built up and tempered into a power capable of crushing
them except over a long period of time. With enemies who so ruthlessly
suppress the Chinese revolution, the revolutionary forces cannot hold
their own positions, let alone capture those of the enemy, unless they
steel themselves and display their tenacity to the full. It is therefore
wrong to think that the forces of the Chinese revolution can be built up
in the twinkling of an eye, or that China's revolutionary struggle can
triumph overnight.

In the face of such enemies, the principal means or form of the Chinese
revolution must be armed struggle, not peaceful struggle. For our
enemies have made peaceful activity impossible for the Chinese people
and have deprived them of all political freedom and democratic rights.
Stalin says, "In China the armed revolution is fighting the armed
counter-revolutionary. That is one of the specific features and one of
the advantages of the Chinese revolution."[22] This formulation is
perfectly correct. Therefore, it is wrong to belittle armed struggle,
revolutionary war, guerrilla war and army work.

In the face of such enemies, there arises the question of revolutionary
base areas. Since China's key cities have long been occupied by the
powerful imperialists and their reactionary Chinese allies, it is
imperative for the revolutionary ranks to turn the backward villages
into advanced, consolidated base areas, into great military, political,
economic and cultural bastions of the revolution from which to fight
their vicious enemies who are using the cities for attacks on the rural
districts, and in this way gradually to achieve the complete victory of
the revolution through protracted fighting; it is imperative for them to
do so if they do not wish to compromise with imperialism and its lackeys
but are determined to fight on, and if they intend to build up and
temper their forces, and avoid decisive battles with a powerful enemy
while their own strength is inadequate. Such being the case, victory in
the Chinese revolution can be won first in the rural areas and this is
possible because China's economic development is uneven (her economy not
being a unified capitalist economy), because her territory is extensive
(which gives the revolutionary forces room to manoeuvre), because the
counter-revolutionary camp is disunited and full of contradictions, and
because the struggle of the peasants who are the main force in the
revolution is led by the Communist Party, the party of the proletariat;
but on the other hand, these very circumstances make the revolution
uneven and render the task of winning complete victory protracted and
arduous. Clearly then the protracted revolutionary struggle in the
revolutionary base areas consists mainly in peasant guerrilla warfare
led by the Chinese Communist Party. Therefore, it is wrong to ignore the
necessity of using rural districts as revolutionary base areas, to
neglect painstaking work among the peasants, and to neglect guerrilla
warfare.

However, stressing armed struggle does not mean abandoning other forms
of struggle; on the contrary, armed struggle cannot succeed unless
co-ordinated with other forms of struggle. And stressing the work in the
rural base areas does not mean abandoning our work in the cities and in
the other vast rural areas which are still under the enemy's rule; on
the contrary, without the work in the cities and in these other rural
areas, our own rural base areas would be isolated and the revolution
would suffer defeat. Moreover, the final objective of the revolution is
the capture of the cities, the enemy's main bases, and this objective
cannot be achieved without adequate work in the cities.

It is thus clear that the revolution cannot triumph either in the rural
areas or in the cities without the destruction of the enemy's army, its
chief weapon against the people. Therefore, besides annihilating the
enemy's troops in battle, there is the important task of disintegrating
them.

It is also clear that the Communist Party must not be impetuous and
adventurist in its propaganda and organizational work in the urban and
rural areas which have been occupied by the enemy and dominated by the
forces of reaction and darkness for a long time but that it must have
well-selected cadres working underground, must accumulate strength and
bide its time there. In leading the people in struggle against the
enemy, the Party must adopt the tactics of advancing step by step slowly
and surely, keeping to the principle of waging struggles on just
grounds, to our advantage, and with restraint, and making use of such
open forms of activity as are permitted by law, decree and social
custom; empty clamour and reckless action can never lead to success.

3. THE TASKS OF THE CHINESE REVOLUTION

Imperialism and the feudal landlord class being the chief enemies of the
Chinese revolution at this stage, what are the present tasks of the
revolution?

Unquestionably, the main tasks are to strike at these two enemies, to
carry out a national revolution to overthrow foreign imperialist
oppression and a democratic revolution to overthrow feudal landlord
oppression, the primary and foremost task being the national revolution
to overthrow imperialism.

These two great tasks are interrelated. Unless imperialist rule is
overthrown, the rule of the feudal landlord class cannot be terminated,
because imperialism is its main support. Conversely, unless help is
given to the peasants in their struggle to overthrow the feudal landlord
class, it will be impossible to build powerful revolutionary contingents
to overthrow imperialist rule, because the feudal landlord class is the
main social base of imperialist rule in China and the peasantry is the
main force in the Chinese revolution. Therefore the two fundamental
tasks, the national revolution and the democratic revolution, are at
once distinct and united.

In fact, the two revolutionary tasks are already linked, since the main
immediate task of the national revolution is to resist the Japanese
imperialist invaders and since the democratic revolution must be
accomplished in order to win the war. It is wrong to regard the national
revolution and the democratic revolution as two entirely different
stages of the revolution.

4. THE MOTIVE FORCES OF THE CHINESE REVOLUTION

Given the nature of Chinese society and the present targets and tasks of
the Chinese revolution as analysed and defined above, what are the
motive forces of the Chinese revolution?

Since Chinese society is colonial, semi-colonial and semi-feudal, since
the targets of the revolution are mainly foreign imperialist rule and
domestic feudalism, and since its tasks are to overthrow these two
oppressors, which of the various classes and strata in Chinese society
constitute the forces capable of fighting them? This is the question of
the motive forces of the Chinese revolution at the present stage. A
clear understanding of this question is indispensable to a correct
solution of the problem of the basic tactics of the Chinese revolution.

What classes are there in present-day Chinese society? There are the
landlord class and the bourgeoisie, the landlord class and the upper
stratum of the bourgeoisie constituting the ruling classes in Chinese
society. And there are the proletariat, the peasantry, and the different
sections of the petty bourgeoisie other than the peasantry, all of which
are still the subject classes in vast areas of China.

The attitude and the stand of these classes towards the Chinese
revolution are entirely determined by their economic status in society.
Thus the motive forces as well as the targets and tasks of the
revolution are determined by the nature of China's socio-economic
system.

Let us now analyse the different classes in Chinese society.

1. THE LANDLORD CLASS

The landlord class forms the main social base for imperialist rule in
China; it is a class which uses the feudal system to exploit and oppress
the peasants, obstructs China's political, economic and cultural
development and plays no progressive role whatsoever.

Therefore, the landlords, as a class, are a target and not a motive
force of the revolution.

In the present War of Resistance a section of the big landlords, along
with one section of the big bourgeoisie (the capitulationists), has
surrendered to the Japanese aggressors and turned traitor, while another
section of the big landlords, along with another section of the big
bourgeoisie (the die-hards), is increasingly wavering even though it is
still in the anti-Japanese camp. But a good many of the enlightened
gentry who are middle and small landlords and who have some capitalist
colouration display some enthusiasm for the war, and we should unite
with them in the common fight against Japan,

2. THE BOURGEOISIE

There is a distinction between the comprador big bourgeoisie and the
national bourgeoisie.

The comprador big bourgeoisie is a class which directly serves the
capitalists of the imperialist countries and is nurtured by them;
countless ties link it closely with the feudal forces in the
countryside. Therefore, it is a target of the Chinese revolution and
never in the history of the revolution has it been a motive force.

However, different sections of the comprador big bourgeoisie owe
allegiance to different imperialist powers, so that when the
contradictions among the latter become very acute and the revolution is
directed mainly against one particular imperialist power, it becomes
possible for the sections of the comprador class which serve other
imperialist groupings to join the current anti-imperialist front to a
certain extent and for a certain period. But they will turn against the
Chinese revolution the moment their masters do.

In the present war the pro-Japanese big bourgeoisie (the
capitulationists) have either surrendered or are preparing to surrender.
The pro-European and pro-American big bourgeoisie (the die-hards) are
wavering more and more, even though they are still in the anti-Japanese
camp, and they are playing the double game of simultaneously resisting
Japan and opposing the Communist Party. Our policy towards the big
bourgeois capitulationists is to treat them as enemies and resolutely
strike them down. Towards the big bourgeois die-hards, we employ a
revolutionary dual policy; on the one hand, we unite with them because
they are still anti-Japanese and we should make use of their
contradictions with Japanese imperialism, but on the other hand, we
firmly struggle against them because they pursue a high-handed
anti-Communist, reactionary policy detrimental to resistance and unity,
both of which would be jeopardized without such a struggle.

The national bourgeoisie is a class with a dual character.

On the one hand, it is oppressed by imperialism and fettered by
feudalism and consequently is in contradiction with both of them. In
this respect it constitutes one of the revolutionary forces. In the
course of the Chinese revolution it has displayed a certain enthusiasm
for fighting imperialism and the governments of bureaucrats and
warlords.

But on the other hand, it lacks the courage to oppose imperialism and
feudalism thoroughly because it is economically and politically flabby
and still has economic ties with imperialism and feudalism. This emerges
very clearly when the people's revolutionary forces grow powerful.

It follows from the dual character of the national bourgeoisie that, at
certain times and to a certain extent, it can take part in the
revolution against imperialism and the governments of bureaucrats and
warlords and can become a revolutionary force, but that at other times
there is the danger of its following the comprador big bourgeoisie and
acting as its accomplice in counter-revolution.

The national bourgeoisie in China, which is mainly the middle
bourgeoisie, has never really held political power but has been
restricted by the reactionary policies of the big landlord class and big
bourgeoisie which are in power, although it followed them in opposing
the revolution in the period from 1927 to 1931 (before the September
18th Incident). In the present war, it differs not only from the
capitulationists of the big landlord class and big bourgeoisie but also
from the big bourgeois die-hards, and so far has been a fairly good any
of ours. Therefore, it is absolutely necessary to have a prudent policy
towards the national bourgeoisie.

3. THE DIFFERENT SECTIONS OF THE PETTY BOURGEOISIE OTHER THAN THE
PEASANTRY

The petty bourgeoisie, other than the peasantry, consists of the vast
numbers of intellectuals, small trades men, handicraftsmen and
professional people.

Their status somewhat resembles that of the middle peasants, they all
suffer under the oppression of imperialism, feudalism and the big
bourgeoisie, and they are being driven ever nearer to bankruptcy or
destitution.

Hence these sections of the petty bourgeoisie constitute one of the
motive forces of the revolution and are a reliable ally of the
proletariat. Only under the leadership of the proletariat can they
achieve their liberation.

Let us now analyse the different sections of the petty bourgeoisie other
than the peasantry.

First, the intellectuals and student youth. They do not constitute a
separate class or stratum. In present-day China most of them may be
placed in the petty-bourgeois category, judging by their family origin,
their living conditions and their political outlook. Their numbers have
grown considerably during the past few decades. Apart from that section
of the intellectuals which has associated itself with the imperialists
and the big bourgeoisie and works for them against the people, most
intellectuals and students are oppressed by imperialism, feudalism and
the big bourgeoisie, and live in fear of unemployment or of having to
discontinue their studies. Therefore, they tend to be quite
revolutionary. They are more or less equipped with bourgeois scientific
knowledge, have a keen political sense and often play a vanguard role or
serve as a link with the masses in the present stage of the revolution.
The movement of the Chinese students abroad before the Revolution of
1911, the May 4th Movement of 1919, the May 30th Movement of 1925 and
the December 9th Movement of 1935 are striking proofs of this. In
particular, the large numbers of more or less impoverished intellectuals
can join hands with the workers and peasants in supporting or
participating in the revolution. In China, it was among the
intellectuals and young students that Marxist-Leninist ideology was
first widely disseminated and accepted. The revolutionary forces cannot
be successfully organized and revolutionary work cannot be successfully
conducted without the participation of revolutionary intellectuals. But
the intellectuals often tend to be subjective and individualistic,
impractical in their thinking and irresolute in action until they have
thrown themselves heart and soul into mass revolutionary struggles, or
made up their minds to serve the interests of the masses and become one
with them. Hence although the mass of revolutionary intellectuals in
China can play a vanguard role or serve as a link with the masses, not
all of them will remain revolutionaries to the end. Some will drop out
of the revolutionary ranks at critical moments and become passive, while
a few may even become enemies of the revolution. The intellectuals can
overcome their shortcomings only in mass struggles over a long period.

Second, the small tradesmen. Generally they run small shops and employ
few or no assistants. They live under the threat of bankruptcy as a
result of exploitation by imperialism, the big bourgeoisie and the
usurers.

Third, the handicraftsmen. They are very numerous. They possess their
own means of production and hire no workers, or only one or two
apprentices or helpers. Their position is similar to that of the middle
peasants.

Fourth, professional people. They include doctors and men of other
professions. They do not exploit other people, or do so only to a slight
degree. Their position is similar to that of the handicraftsmen.

These sections of the petty bourgeoisie make up a vast multitude of
people whom we must win over and whose interests we must protect because
in general they can support or join the revolution and are good allies.
Their weakness is that some of them are easily influenced by the
bourgeoisie; consequently, we must carry on revolutionary propaganda and
organizational work among them.

4. THE PEASANTRY

The peasantry constitutes approximately 80 per cent of China's total
population and is the main force in her national economy today.

A sharp process of polarization is taking place among the peasantry.

First, the rich peasants. They form about 5 per cent of the rural
population (or about 10 per cent together with the landlords) and
constitute the rural bourgeoisie. Most of the rich peasants in China are
semi-feudal in character, since they let a part of their land, practice
usury and ruthlessly exploit the farm labourers. But they generally
engage in labour themselves and in this sense are part of the peasantry.
The rich-peasant form of production will remain useful for a definite
period. Generally speaking, they might make some contribution to the
anti-imperialist struggle of the peasant masses and stay neutral in the
agrarian revolutionary struggle against the landlords. Therefore we
should not regard the rich peasants as belonging to the same class as
the landlords and should not prematurely adopt a policy of liquidating
the rich peasantry.

Second, the middle peasants. They form about 20 per cent of China's
rural population. They are economically self-supporting (they may have
something to lay aside when the crops are good, and occasionally hire
some labour or lend small sums of money at interest); and generally they
do not exploit others but are exploited by imperialism, the landlord
class and the bourgeoisie. They have no political rights. Some of them
do not have enough land, and only a section (the well-to-do middle
peasants) have some surplus land. Not only can the middle peasants join
the anti-imperialist revolution and the Agrarian Revolution, but they
can also accept socialism. Therefore the whole middle peasantry can be a
reliable ally of the proletariat and is an important motive force of the
revolution. The positive or negative attitude of the middle peasants is
one of the factors determining victory or defeat in the revolution, and
this is especially true after the agrarian revolution when they become
the majority of the rural population.

Third, the poor peasants. The poor peasants in China, together with the
farm labourers, form about 70 per cent of the rural population. They are
the broad peasant masses with no land or insufficient land, the
semi-proletariat of the countryside, the biggest motive force of the
Chinese revolution, the natural and most reliable ally of the
proletariat and the main contingent of China's revolutionary forces.
Only under the leadership of the proletariat can the poor and middle
peasants achieve their liberation, and only by forming a firm alliance
with the poor and middle peasants can the proletariat lead the
revolution to victory. Otherwise neither is possible. The term
"peasantry" refers mainly to the poor and middle peasants.

5. The Proletariat

Among the Chinese proletariat, the modern industrial workers number from
2,500,000 to 3,000,000, the workers in small-scale industry and in
handicrafts and the shop assistants in the cities total about
12,000,000, and in addition there are great numbers of rural
proletarians (the farm labourers) and other propertyless people in the
cities and the countryside.

In addition to the basic qualities it shares with the proletariat
everywhere--its association with the most advanced form of economy, its
strong sense of organization and discipline and its lack of private
means of production--the Chinese proletariat has many other outstanding
qualities.

What are they?

First, the Chinese proletariat is more resolute and thoroughgoing in
revolutionary struggle than any other class because it is subjected to a
threefold oppression (imperialist, bourgeois and feudal) which is marked
by a severity and cruelty seldom found in other countries. Since there
is no economic basis for social reformism in colonial and semi-colonial
China as there is in Europe, the whole proletariat, with the exception
of a few scabs, is most revolutionary.

Secondly, from the moment it appeared on the revolutionary scene, the
Chinese proletariat came under the leadership of its own revolutionary
party--the Communist Party of China--and became the most politically
conscious class in Chinese society.

Thirdly, because the Chinese proletariat by origin is largely made up of
bankrupted peasants, it has natural ties with the peasant masses, which
facilitates its forming a close alliance with them.

Therefore, in spite of certain unavoidable weaknesses, for instance, its
smallness (as compared with the peasantry), its youth (as compared with
the proletariat in the capitalist countries) and its low educational
level (as compared with the bourgeoisie), the Chinese proletariat is
nonetheless the basic motive force of the Chinese revolution. Unless it
is led by the proletariat, the Chinese revolution cannot possibly
succeed. To take an example from the past, the Revolution of 1911
miscarried because the proletariat did not consciously participate in it
and the Communist Party was not yet in existence. More recently, the
revolution of 1924-27 achieved great success for a time because the
proletariat consciously participated and exercised leadership and the
Communist Party was already in existence; it ended in defeat because the
big bourgeoisie betrayed its alliance with the proletariat and abandoned
the common revolutionary programme, and also because the Chinese
proletariat and its political party did not yet have enough
revolutionary experience. Now take the present anti-Japanese
war--because the proletariat and the Communist Party are exercising
leadership in the Anti-Japanese National United Front, the whole nation
has been united and the great War of Resistance has been launched and is
being resolutely pursued.

The Chinese proletariat should understand that although it is the class
with the highest political consciousness and sense of organization, it
cannot win victory by its own strength alone. In order to win, it must
unite, according to varying circumstances, with all classes and strata
that can take part in the revolution, and must organize a revolutionary
united front. Among all the classes in Chinese society, the peasantry is
a firm ally of the working class, the urban petty bourgeoisie is a
reliable ally, and the national bourgeoisie is an ally in certain
periods and to a certain extent. This is one of the fundamental laws
established by China's modern revolutionary history.

6. THE VAGRANTS

China's status as a colony and semi-colony has given rise to a multitude
of rural and urban unemployed. Denied proper means of making a living,
many of them are forced to resort to illegitimate ones, hence the
robbers, gangsters, beggars and prostitutes and the numerous people who
live on superstitious practices. This social stratum is unstable; while
some are apt to be bought over by the reactionary forces, others may
join the revolution. These people lack constructive qualities and are
given to destruction rather than construction; after joining the
revolution, they become a source of roving-rebel and anarchist ideology
in the revolutionary ranks. Therefore, we should know how to remould
them and guard against their destructiveness.

The above is our analysis of the motive forces of the Chinese
revolution.

5. THE CHARACTER OF THE CHINESE REVOLUTION

We have now gained an understanding of the nature of Chinese society,
_i.e.,_ of the specific conditions in China; this understanding is the
essential prerequisite for solving all China's revolutionary problems.
We are also clear about the targets, the tasks and the motive forces of
the Chinese revolution; these are basic issues at the present stage of
the revolution and arise from the special nature of Chinese society,
_i.e.,_ from China's specific conditions. Understanding all this, we can
now understand another basic issue of the revolution at the present
stage, _i.e.,_ the character of the Chinese revolution.

What, indeed, is the character of the Chinese revolution at the present
stage? Is it a bourgeois-democratic or a proletarian-socialist
revolution? Obviously, it is not the latter but the former.

Since Chinese society is colonial, semi-colonial and semi-feudal, since
the principal enemies of the Chinese revolution are imperialism and
feudalism, since the tasks of the revolution are to overthrow these two
enemies by means of a national and democratic revolution in which the
bourgeoisie sometimes takes part, and since the edge of the revolution
is directed against imperialism and feudalism and not against capitalism
and capitalist private property in general even if the big bourgeoisie
betrays the revolution and becomes its enemy -- since all this is true,
the character of the Chinese revolution at the present stage is not
proletarian-socialist but bourgeois-democratic.[23]

However, in present-day China the bourgeois-democratic revolution is no
longer of the old general type, which is now obsolete, but one of a new
special type. We call this type the new-democratic revolution and it is
developing in all other colonial and semi-colonial countries as well as
in China. The new-democratic revolution is part of the world
proletarian-socialist revolution, for it resolutely opposes imperialism,
_i.e._, international capitalism. Politically, it strives for the joint
dictatorship of the revolutionary classes over the imperialists,
traitors and reactionaries, and opposes the transformation of Chinese
society into a society under bourgeois dictatorship. Economically, it
aims at the nationalization of all the big enterprises and capital of
the imperialists, traitors and reactionaries, and the distribution among
the peasants of the land held by the landlords, while preserving private
capitalist enterprise in general and not eliminating the rich-peasant
economy. Thus, the new type of democratic revolution clears the way for
capitalism on the one hand and creates the prerequisites for socialism
on the other. The present stage of the Chinese revolution is a stage of
transition between the abolition of the colonial, semi-colonial and
semi-feudal society and the establishment of a socialist society,
_i.e._, it is a process of new-democratic revolution. This process,
begun only after the First World War and the Russian October Revolution,
started in China with the May 4th Movement of 1919. A new-democratic
revolution is an anti-imperialist and anti-feudal revolution of the
broad masses of the people under the leadership of the proletariat.
Chinese society can advance to socialism only through such a revolution;
there is no other way.

The new-democratic revolution is vastly different from the democratic
revolutions of Europe and America in that it results not in a
dictatorship of the bourgeoisie but in a dictatorship of the united
front of all the revolutionary classes under the leadership of the
proletariat. In the present War of Resistance, the anti-Japanese
democratic political power established in the base areas which are under
the leadership of the Communist Party is the political power of the
Anti-Japanese National United Front; this is neither a bourgeois nor a
proletarian one-class dictatorship, but a joint dictatorship of the
revolutionary classes under the leadership of the proletariat. All who
stand for resistance to Japan and for democracy are entitled to share in
this political power, regardless of their party affiliation.

The new-democratic revolution also differs from a socialist revolution
in that it overthrows the rule of the imperialists, traitors and
reactionaries in China but does not destroy any section of capitalism
which is capable of contributing to the anti-imperialist, anti-feudal
struggle.

The new-democratic revolution is basically in line with the revolution
envisaged in the Three People's Principles as advocated by Dr. Sun
Yat-sen in 1924. In the Manifesto of the First National Congress of the
Kuomintang issued in that year, Dr. Sun stated:

The so-called democratic system in modern states is usually monopolized
by the bourgeoisie and has become simply an instrument for oppressing
the common people. On the other hand the Kuomintang's Principle of
Democracy means a democratic system shared by all the common people and
not privately owned by the few.

He added:

Enterprises, such as banks, railways and airlines, whether Chinese-owned
or foreign-owned, which are either monopolistic in character or too big
for private management, shall be operated and administrated by the
state, so that private capital cannot dominate the livelihood of the
people: this is the main principle of the regulation of capital.

And again in his Testament, Dr. Sun pointed out the fundamental
principle for domestic and foreign policy: "We must arouse the masses of
the people and unite in a common struggle with those nations of the
world which treat us as equals." The Three People's Principles of the
old democracy, which were adapted to the old international and domestic
conditions, were thus reshaped into the Three People's Principles of New
Democracy, which are adapted to the new international and domestic
conditions. The Communist Party of China was referring to the latter
kind of Three People's Principles and to no other when, in its Manifesto
of September 22, 1937, it declared that "the Three People's Principles
being what China needs today, our Party is ready to fight for their
complete realization". These Three People's Principles embody Dr. Sun
Yat-sen's Three Great Policies--alliance with Russia, co-operation with
the Communist Party and assistance to the peasants and workers. In the
new international and domestic conditions, any kind of Three People's
Principles which departs from the Three Great Policies is not
revolutionary. (Here we shall not deal with the fact that, while
communism and the Three People's Principles agree on the basic political
programme for the democratic revolution, they differ in all other
respects.)

Thus, the role of the proletariat, the peasantry and the other sections
of the petty bourgeoisie in China's bourgeois-democratic revolution
cannot be ignored, either in the alignment of forces for the struggle
(that is, in the united front) or in the organization of state power.
Anyone who tries to bypass these classes will certainly be unable to
solve the problem of the destiny of the Chinese nation or indeed any of
China's problems. The Chinese revolution at the present stage must
strive to create a democratic republic in which the workers, the
peasants and the other sections of the petty bourgeoisie all occupy a
definite position and play a definite role. In other words, it must be a
democratic republic based on a revolutionary alliance of the workers'
peasants, urban petty bourgeoisie and all others who are against
imperialism and feudalism. Only under the leadership of the proletariat
can such a republic be completely realized.

6. THE PERSPECTIVES OF THE CHINESE REVOLUTION

Now that the basic issues--the nature of Chinese society and the
targets, tasks, motive forces and character of the Chinese revolution at
the present stage--have been clarified, it is easy to see its
perspectives, that is, to understand the relation between the
bourgeois-democratic and the proletarian-socialist revolution, or
between the present and future stages of the Chinese revolution.

There can be no doubt that the ultimate perspective of the Chinese
revolution is not capitalism but socialism and communism, since China's
bourgeois-democratic revolution at the present stage is not of the old
general type but is a democratic revolution of a new special type-- a
new-democratic revolution--and since it is taking place in the new
international environment of the Nineteen Thirties and Forties
characterized by the rise of socialism and the decline of capitalism, in
the period of the Second World War and the era of revolution.

However, it is not at all surprising but entirely to be expected that a
capitalist economy will develop to a certain extent within Chinese
society with the sweeping away of the obstacles to the development of
capitalism after the victory of the revolution, since the purpose of the
Chinese revolution at the present stage is to change the existing
colonial, semi-colonial and semi-feudal state of society, _i.e._, to
strive for the completion of the new-democratic revolution. A certain
degree of capitalist development will be an inevitable result of the
victory of the democratic revolution in economically backward China. But
that will be only one aspect of the outcome of the Chinese revolution
and not the whole picture. The whole picture will show the development
of socialist as well as capitalist factors. What will the socialist
factors be? The increasing relative importance of the proletariat and
the Communist Party among the political forces in the country;
leadership by the proletariat and the Communist Party which the
peasantry, intelligentsia and the urban petty bourgeoisie already accept
or are likely to accept; and the state sector of the economy owned by
the democratic republic, and the co-operative sector of the economy
owned by the working people. All these will be socialist factors. With
the addition of a favourable international environment, these factors
render it highly probable that China's bourgeois-democratic revolution
will ultimately avoid a capitalist future and enjoy a socialist future.

7. THE TWOFOLD TASK OF THE CHINESE REVOLUTION AND THE CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY

Summing up the foregoing sections of this chapter, we can see that the
Chinese revolution taken as a whole involves a twofold task. That is to
say, it embraces both the bourgeois-democratic revolution (the
new-democratic revolution) and the proletarian-socialist revolution,
_i.e.,_ both the present and future stages of the revolution. The
leadership in this twofold revolutionary task devolves on the Chinese
Communist Party, the party of the proletariat, without whose leadership
no revolution can succeed.

To complete China's bourgeois-democratic revolution (the new-democratic
revolution) and to transform it into a socialist revolution when all the
necessary conditions are ripe--such is the sum total of the great and
glorious revolutionary task of the Chinese Communist Party. Every Party
member must strive for its accomplishment and must under no
circumstances give up halfway. Some immature Communists think that our
task is confined to the present democratic revolution and does not
include the future socialist revolution, or that the present revolution
or the Agrarian Revolution is actually a socialist revolution. It must
be emphatically pointed out that these views are wrong. Every Communist
ought to know that, taken as a whole, the Chinese revolutionary movement
led by the Communist Party embraces the two stages, _i.e.,_ the
democratic and the socialist revolutions, which are two essentially
different revolutionary processes, and that the second process can be
carried through only after the first has been completed. The democratic
revolution is the necessary preparation for the socialist revolution,
and the socialist revolution is the inevitable sequel to the democratic
revolution. The ultimate aim for which all communists strive is to bring
about a socialist and communist society. A clear understanding of both
the differences and the interconnections between the democratic and the
socialist revolutions is indispensable to correct leadership in the
Chinese revolution.

Except for the Communist Party, no political party (bourgeois or
petty-bourgeois) is equal to the task of leading China's two great
revolutions, the democratic and the socialist revolutions, to complete
fulfilment. From the very day of its birth, the Communist Party has
taken this twofold task on its own shoulders and for eighteen years has
fought strenuously for its accomplishment.

It is a task at once glorious and arduous. And it cannot be accomplished
without a bolshevized Chinese Communist Party which is national in scale
and has a broad mass character, a party fully consolidated
ideologically, politically and organizationally. Therefore every
Communist has the duty of playing an active part in building up such a
Communist Party.

_NOTES_

1. With reference to the invention of the compass, the magnetic power of
the loadstone was mentioned as early as the 3rd century BC by Lu Pu-wei
in his _Almanac,_ and at the beginning of the 1st century AD, Wang
Chung, the materialist philosopher, observed in his _Lun Heng_ that the
loadstone points to the south, which indicates that magnetic polarity
was known by then. Works of travel written at the beginning of the
12^(th) century show that the compass was already in general use among
Chinese navigators at that time.

2. It is recorded in ancient documents that Tsai Lun, a eunuch of the
Eastern Han Dynasty (AD 25-220), invented paper, which he had made from
bark, hemp, rags and worn-out fishing nets. In AD 105 (the last year of
the reign of Emperor Ho Ti), Tsai Lun presented his invention to the
emperor, and subsequently this method of making paper from plant fibre
gradually spread in China.

3. Block-printing was invented about A.D. 600, in the Sui Dynasty.

4. Movable type was invented by Pi Sheng in the Sung Dynasty between
1041 and 1048.

5. According to tradition, gunpowder was invented in China in the 9^(th)
century and by the 11^(th) century it was already in use for firing
cannon.

6. Chen Sheng, Wu Kuang, Hsian Yu and Liu Pang were leaders of the first
great peasant uprising in the Chin Dynasty. In 209 B.C. Chen Sheng and
Wu Kuang, who were among nine hundred conscripts on their way to take up
garrison duty at a frontier post, organized a revolt in Chihsien County
(now Suhsien County in Anhwei Province) against the tyranny of the Chin
Dynasty. Hsiang Yu and Liu Pang were the most prominent of those who
rose in response to this armed uprising all over the country. Hsiang
Yu's army annihilated the main forces of Chin, and Liu Pang's troops
took Chin's capital. In the ensuing struggle between Liu Pang and Hsiang
Yu, Liu Pang defeated Hsiang Yu and founded the Han Dynasty.

7. The Hsinshih, the Pinglin, the Red Eyebrows and the Bronze Horses are
the names of peasant uprisings in the latter years of the Western Han
Dynasty when peasant unrest was widespread. In A.D. 8, Wang Mang
overthrew the reigning dynasty, ascended the throne and introduced a few
reforms to stave off the peasant unrest. But the starving masses in
Hsinshih (in what is now Chingshan County in Hupeh) and Pinglin (in what
is now Suihsien County in Hupeh) rose in revolt. The Bronze Horses and
the Red Eyebrows were the peasant forces which revolted during his reign
in what are now central Hopei and central Shantung Provinces. The Red
Eyebrows, the largest of the peasant forces, were so named because the
soldiers painted their eyebrows red.

8. The Yellow Turbans, a peasant force which revolted in A.D. 184, were
named after their headgear.

9. Li Mi and Tou Chien-teh were leaders of great peasant uprisings
against the Sui Dynasty in Honan and Hopei respectively at the opening
of the 7th century.

10. Wang Hsien-chih organized an uprising in Shantung in A.D. 874. In
the following year Huang Chao organized an uprising to support him.

11. Sung Chiang and Fang La were famous leaders of peasant uprisings
early in the 12th century; Sung Chiang was active along the borders
between Shantung, Hopei, Honan and Kiangsu, while Fang La was active in
Chekiang and Anhwei.

12. In 1351, the people in many parts of the country rose in revolt
against the rule of the Yuan (Mongol) Dynasty. In 1352, Chu Yuan-chang
joined the rebel forces led by Kuo Tzu-hsing and became their commander
upon the latter's death. In 1368, he finally succeeded in overthrowing
the rule of the Mongol Dynasty, which had been tottering under the
attacks of the people's forces, and founded the Ming Dynasty.

13. Li Tzu-cheng, also called King Chuang (the Dare-All King), native of
Michih, northern Shensi, was the leader of a peasant revolt which led to
the overthrow of the Ming Dynasty. The revolt first started in northern
Shensi in 1628. Li joined the forces led by Kao Ying-hsiang and
campaigned through Honan and Anhwei and back to Shensi. After Kao's
death in 1636, Li succeeded him, becoming King Chuang, and campaigned in
and out of the provinces of Shensi, Szechuan, Honan and Hupeh. Finally
he captured the imperial capital of Peking in 1644, whereupon the last
Ming emperor committed suicide. The chief slogan he spread among the
masses was "Support King Chuang, and pay no grain taxes". Another slogan
of his to enforce discipline among his men ran: "Any murder means the
killing of my father, any rape means the violation of my mother." Thus
he won the support of the masses and his movement became the main
current of the peasant revolts raging all over the country. As he, too,
roamed about without ever establishing relatively consolidated base
areas, he was eventually defeated by Wu San-kuei, a Ming general, who
colluded with the Ching troops in a joint attack on Li.

14. From 1856 to 1860 Britain and France jointly waged a war of
aggression against China, with the United States and tsarist Russia
supporting them from the side-lines. The government of the Ching Dynasty
was then devoting all its energies to suppressing the peasant revolution
of the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom and adopted a policy of passive
resistance towards the foreign aggressors. The Anglo-French forces
occupied such major cities as Canton, Tientsin and Peking, plundered and
burned down the Yuan Ming Yuan Palace in Peking and forced the Ching
government to conclude the Treaties of Tientsin and Peking. Their main
provisions included the opening of Tientsin, Newchwang, Tengchow,
Taiwan, Tamsui, Chaochow, Chiungchow, Nanking, Chinkiang, Kinkiang and
Hankow as treaty ports, and the granting to foreigners of special
privileges for travel, missionary activities and inland navigation in
China's interior. From then on, the foreign forces of aggression spread
through all China's coastal provinces and penetrated deep into the
hinterland.

15. In 1882-83, the French aggressors invaded the northern part of
Indo-China. In 1884-85 they extended their war of aggression to the
Chinese provinces of Kwangsi, Taiwan, Fukien and Chekiang. Despite the
victories gained in this war, the corrupt Ching government signed the
humiliating Treaty of Tientsin.

16. In 1900 eight imperialist powers, Britain, the United States,
Germany, France, tsarist Russia, Japan, Italy and Austria, sent a joint
force to attack China in their attempt to suppress the Yi Ho Tuan
Movement of the Chinese people against aggression. The Chinese people
resisted heroically. The allied forces of the eight powers captured Taku
and occupied Tientsin and Peking. In 1901 the Ching government concluded
a treaty with the eight imperialist countries; its main provisions were
that China had to pay those countries the huge sum of 450 million taels
of silver as war reparations and grant them the special privilege of
stationing troops in Peking and in the area from Peking to Tientsin and
Shanhaikuan.

17. Consular jurisdiction was one of the special privileges provided in
the unequal treaties which the imperialist powers forced on the
governments of old China-- beginning with the supplementary treaty to
the Sino-British Treaty of Nanking, signed at Humen (the Bogue) in 1843,
and with the Sino-American Treaty of Wanghia in 1844. It meant that, if
a national of any country enjoying the privilege of consular
jurisdiction in China became a defendant in a lawsuit, civil or
criminal, he was not to be tried by a Chinese court but by the consul of
his own country.

18. Spheres of influence were different parts of China marked off at the
end of the 19th century by the imperialist powers that committed
aggression against China. Each of these powers marked off those areas
which fell within its economic and military influence. Thus, the
provinces in the lower and middle Yangtse valley were specified as the
British sphere of influence; Yunnan, Kwangtung and Kwangsi as the
French; Shantung as the German sphere; Fukien as the Japanese, and the
three northeastern provinces (the present provinces of Liaoning, Kirin
and Heilungkiang) as the tsarist Russian sphere. After the
Russo-Japanese War of 1905 the southern part of the three northeastern
provinces came under Japanese influence.

19. The foreign concessions were areas which the imperialist powers
seized in the treaty ports after compelling the Ching government to open
these ports. In these so-called concessions they enforced an imperialist
system of colonial rule entirely independent of Chinese law and
administration. Through those concessions, the imperialists exercised
direct or indirect political and economic control over the Chinese
feudal and comprador regime. During the revolution of 1924-27 the
revolutionary people led by the Chinese Communist Party started a
movement to abolish the concessions, and in January 1927 they took over
the British concessions in Hankow and Kiukiang. However, the
imperialists retained various concessions after Chiang Kai-shek betrayed
the revolution.

20. "The Theses on the Revolutionary Movement in Colonial and
Semi-Colonial Countries" adopted by the Sixth Comintern Congress,
stenographic record of the Sixth Comintern Congress, issue No. 6, Russ.
ed., Moscow, 1929, p. 128.

21. J. V. Stalin, "The Revolution in China and the Tasks of the
Comintern", _Works_, Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, 1954, Vol. IX, p. 292.

22. J. V. Stalin, "The Prospects of the Revolution in China", Works,
Eng. ed. FLPH, Moscow, 1954, Vol. VIII, p. 379.

23. See V. I. Lenin, "The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the
First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907", _Collected Works,_ Eng. ed., FLPH,
Moscow, 1962, Vol. XIII, pp. 219-429.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project.
HTML revised 2004 by Marxists.org

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung

Save
