MIA  >  Archive  >  Mandel

 


Ernest Mandel



A THEORY WHICH HAS NOT WITHSTOOD THE TEST OF FACTS


(Winter 1990)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From INTERNATIONAL SOCIALISM 2 : 49, Winter 1990.
Translated by Gareth Jenkins.
Copied from the blog _Chris Harman’s Back Pages_..
Marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the MARXISTS’ INTERNET ARCHIVE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Tony Cliff based his theory that the USSR and countries with analogous
socio-economic structures are ‘state-capitalist’ on a set of hypotheses
which are taken as axiomatic. We shall outline six of them:

i.  Soviet society and the societies of Western Europe, of the United
    States and of Japan are all qualitatively the same since they are
    all capitalist.
     
ii. In the USSR a new ruling class exists which is not based on private
    property but which can nevertheless be characterised as capitalist.
     
iii. The Soviet economy is fundamentally ruled by the law of value,
    ‘operating via the world market’, even though internal competition
    has been eliminated.
     
iv. Just like Western and Japanese capitalists, the Russian ruling class
    is basically driven by the need to accumulate: ‘production for the
    sake of production’.
     
v.  Crises of overproduction are absent because ‘organised capitalism’
    allows them to be avoided in the USSR. [1]
     
vi. Furthermore, general crises of overproduction do not exist in the
    imperialist countries either, in view of the tendency towards
    ‘organised capitalism’ and the importance of the armaments sector in
    their economies.

Events over the last 15 years have inflicted one cruel blow after the
other on these dogmatic assertions. [2] The generalised recessions of
the world capitalist economy in 1974–5 and 1980–2 were truly classic
crises of overproduction, the mitigating effects of inflation
notwithstanding. In scale they exceeded, rather than being below, the
average capitalist crisis of overproduction of the last century and a
half. What then remains of the myth of ‘organised capitalism’ and
Hilferding’s _Generalkartell_?

Nothing similar has taken place in the USSR. If there is a crisis in
that country it is one of underproduction of use values (of scarcity)
and not one of overproduction of exchange values (of commodities). To
claim that the first is only a variant of the second is a gross fallacy.
An empty shop is not ‘a variant’ of a shop stuffed full of unsellable
goods.

A process of restoration of capitalism is under way in several East
European countries. [3] In at least one country, the GDR, that process
is almost complete. Literally no one in these countries, or in the
world, denies the evidence. This presents the followers of the theory of
state capitalism with an insoluble problem: how is it possible under
capitalism to restore capitalism?

They try to get out of this difficulty by claiming that ‘private
capitalism’ is different from ‘state capitalism’. But that only pushes
the problem one stage further back: either the difference between
‘state’ and ‘private’ capitalism is a qualitative one – in which case,
why use the same concept to cover both? Or the difference is purely
quantitative. In which case, the whole initial problem re-emerges more
strongly. Can one seriously argue that there was only a quantitative
difference between the GDR and the Federal Republic? Does the Federal
Republic’s _Anschluss_ change nothing basic in the GDR’s actual
socio-economic system? Are the societies of North and South Korea
qualitatively the same?

To reduce the nature of capitalism simply to the wish to accumulate
(‘production for the sake of production’) is to dismiss much of Volumes
1 and 3 of CAPITAL, and the whole of Volume 2. Capitalist production is
generalised commodity production. Every commodity contains within itself
a contradiction between use value and exchange value, as well as a
contradiction between commodity and money. An ‘organised capitalism’
that overcame these contradictions would no longer be capitalism, at
least not in the sense analysed and defined by Marx.

Capital exists and can only exist with money-capital as its starting
point. Capital is value looking to increase in value, to surplus value.
Of necessity it must eventually recover its initial money form, despite
the fact that while engaged in the production process it no longer has
that form. Without money there can be no capital accumulation.

These are not esoteric abstractions. We are at the heart of the matter.
It is of no use for a capitalist just to make the workers he exploits
produce the maximum of surplus value. He cannot transform a car pound or
warehouses full of colour televisions into additional machines or steel,
or into wages for extra workers, or into private jets for his own
consumption. He cannot accumulate capital simply by producing surplus
value. He must realise that surplus value through the sale of the
commodities that have been produced in order to accumulate capital. As
Marx says, the process of (expanded) reproduction, that is to say, the
process of accumulation, is the unity of both the process of production
and the process of realisation of surplus value. These two never
coincide automatically. Without the process of realisation no
accumulation is possible. What makes periodic crises of overproduction
inevitable is the inevitable contradiction between the two poles of this
unity. Moreover, the same contradiction activates a series of mechanisms
typical of the capitalist economy. These were carefully analysed by Marx
and can be called ‘the laws of motion’ of the capitalist economy.

To know whether a society is basically capitalist or not we have
therefore to ask the question (and back it up factually): are the laws
of capitalist motion in evidence?

Just to point to the extraction of surplus labour from the direct
producers is insufficient. At night all cats are grey. For thousands of
years since primitive communism surplus labour has always been extracted
from the direct producers, and this will continue until we reach the
future classless socialist society. But that does not make all these
societies capitalist. Marx says that in the last analysis the nature of
each society (except classless society) is determined by the specific
form in which surplus labour is extracted (MARX ENGELS WORKS, Vol. 27,
p. 799). And under capitalism that takes the specific form of the
transformation of labour power into a commodity, of its sale to
capitalists for money, of capitalists buying the means of production for
money, of the appropriation by these same capitalists of the products of
wage labour, and of the sale of these commodities in order to make
roughly the average profit. Without all these specific mechanisms,
capitalism does not exist for Marx, at least not as a dominant mode of
production.

Our interpretation of the present day capitalist economy and of present
day Soviet economy allows the inner coherence of Marxist theory to be
preserved. Cliff’s theory destroys any type of coherence unless
essential elements of Marxist theory are jettisoned. So whatever
advantage it claims in explaining the USSR is lost when it comes to
explaining present day capitalism.

The idea of the bureaucracy as a ruling class really has to be taken
with a smile after what has happened in Hungary, Poland and the GDR (to
quote only those examples). Has any ruling class in history ever been
seen to literally tiptoe away from the stage of society, as a
significant section of the _nomenklatura_ in those countries is now
doing?

According to chapter one of Volume 1 of CAPITAL, a commodity is only a
commodity because it is the product of private acts of labour performed
independently one from the other. To present the Soviet economy in terms
of a capitalist economy therefore implies that industrial labour there
consists of ‘private acts of labour performed independently one from the
other’: an absurd description if ever there was one.

To say that an act of labour is private means that no capitalist (firm)
knows whether the labour costs expended (both living and dead) will be
recognised as socially necessary costs, that is to say, whether they
will be paid for by society. It is only after the sale of the
commodities that the capitalist learns whether he has gained or lost. If
the labour expended has been socially necessary, he obtains an average
profit. If social labour has been wasted, he gets less than the average
profit or goes bankrupt.

At the first sign of sale at a loss or of below average profits, he
attempts to change the way in which production is organised. He will try
to improve the technology, to use better machines, to save on raw
materials and energy, to extract more surplus labour from his workforce,
to spread his investments, to get access to cheaper credit, and so on.
The organisation of labour depends in the first place on the private
decisions of the factory owner, which is then corrected by competition,
by the market. He has to submit to these corrections or face extinction.
Under capitalism there is only one overall measure of performance –
realised profit. The more productivity is raised, and the lower the
costs of production, the greater the likelihood that his profit will
outstrip that of his competitors. But there is nothing automatic about
this. It is the post-sale profits that determine everything. The
capitalist economy is an economy based on profit, and profit can only be
realised and measured in the form of money.

This is where the famous ‘law of value’ enters into play. It determines
the social nature of labour through commodities exchanging at equivalent
values and so operates under capitalism as the tendency to create an
average rate of profit. Capitals move out of enterprises and sectors of
below average profit into those of above average profit. Thus, as Harman
himself emphasises, the essential function of the law of value under
capitalism is to ensure that productive resources are allocated through
objective mechanisms, these being imposed on enterprises and
capitalists, as well as on workers, behind their backs and independently
of their will and decisions.

However, the law of value only rules any economy in so far as it is one
of generalised commodity production, that is, one in which labour is
basically private labour. In pre-capitalist societies this is not the
case. Here the law of value is not determinant, even if it has already
begun to influence economic decisions. A French peasant of the 11th
century, a Russian peasant of the 18th century, or a Peruvian peasant of
the first half of the 20th century, does not alter his decisions to sow
or reap in line with the price of wheat rising or falling, for the
simple reason that 95 percent of his production is not for the market.
In these societies the bulk of productive resources are directly
allocated to different sectors by those who control the means of
production. Direct, _a priori_ allocation is the opposite of _a
posteriori_ allocation brought about through the law of value. This
difference between two methods of resource allocation marks the
opposition between planning and the market.

In the USSR the essential investments are not decided via the law of
value. They are decided by the bureaucracy, mostly at state level. It is
a planned economy (that implies no value judgement: an economy can be
planned in an irrational, even senseless manner) as far as direct
allocation of resources is concerned. For 70 years, ‘loss’ making
enterprises requiring large subsidies have received a preferential
allocation of productive resources. These have been systematically
diverted from ‘more profitable’ enterprises or sectors. Such phenomena
are unthinkable under capitalism and the rule of the law of value. But
if the law of value does not rule ‘directly’ in the USSR, does it do so
‘indirectly’ through the intermediary of the world market?

Dogmatically, as if it were a revealed truth, Cliff and Harman claim
this to be the case. They cannot prove it. Any rule of the law of value
‘through the intermediary of the world market’ has to operate via trade,
like anything to do with capitalism. Enterprises that fail to compete
with imported goods are doomed to go under. At least two thirds, if not
more, of Soviet enterprises do not compete with imperialist enterprises.
If they were subject to the law of value operating ‘through the
intermediary of the world market’, they would be forced to close (like
Mexican steelworks or British coal mines). There is therefore no ‘rule
of the law of value’ in the USSR ‘through the intermediary of the world
market’.
 

A hybrid economy

However, even though the functioning of the Soviet economy is not
dominated by the law of value, it cannot abstract itself from its
influence. While it is not a capitalist economy, that is, an economy
based on generalised commodity production, neither is it a socialist
economy geared to the direct satisfaction of human need, an economy in
which labour possesses an immediately social character. It is a
post-capitalist economy with elements of the market. Partial survival of
commodity production is combined with the partial rule of the direct
allocation of productive resources.

This combination is hybrid and contradictory. It implies that the fate
of the USSR as a transitional society between capitalism and socialism,
‘frozen’ at its present stage by the bureaucratic dictatorship, has not
yet been settled historically. A social counter-revolution can pull the
USSR back towards capitalism. A victorious anti-bureaucratic political
revolution can push it in the direction of socialism (no more than that:
socialism in one country is impossible no matter how pure, democratic,
revolutionary or internationalist a government based on workers’ power
may be).

Comrades from the Socialist Workers Party in Britain (SWP) find this
notion of hybrid combination, the perpetuation of which lacks all
certainty, this ‘transition between two progressive modes of production’
(to quote Marx’s celebrated formula), difficult to accept and
understand. They are quite wrong. We are talking here of a phenomenon
that has occurred in practically every epoch when a given mode of
production has entered its historical period of decline and decay.

To give just one example – between the decline of the feudal mode of
production and the triumph of capitalism a transitional epoch intervened
in which petty commodity production dominated, stretching over several
centuries. Petty commodity production has its own characteristics which
are neither those of feudalism (serfdom) or of capitalism (wage labour).
The predominant form of labour is the free labour of small proprietors
or semi-proprietors, owning their own means of production.

We are not talking here of a new mode of production able to perpetuate
itself automatically. Petty commodity production is capable of
regression towards feudalism, which is what happened in a large area of
central and eastern Europe from the 16th century onwards, the period of
the ‘second serfdom’. It is also capable of moving towards capitalism,
that is towards the predominance of wage labour, which is what happened
in the Netherlands and in England from the 17th and 18th centuries
onwards. But in both cases the small independent producers disappeared
only little by little.

The same rule can be applied more or less to the period of transition
between capitalism and socialism. Either what remains of commodity
production will finally eliminate most of the direct appropriation and
allocation of the social surplus product – in which case, capitalism
will be restored. Or society will throw off the deadweight of the
bureaucracy and ensure that the direct appropriation and allocation of
major resources for the satisfaction of needs as democratically decided
by the masses will predominate – in which case, the unavoidable survival
of some market mechanisms will no longer be able to put a brake on
genuine progress towards socialism. But in both cases, what is specific
about today’s hybrid Soviet situation will have largely disappeared.

Once again, it is not a question of some abstract theoretical schema.
Our understanding of the principal causes of the specific economic
crisis characteristic of the USSR is rooted in reality. Current
mystification notwithstanding, what the Soviet economy suffers from is
at one and the same time too little central planning (democratic
planning, let it be understood, not bureaucratic planning) and too
little of the market (in all those areas where as a result of the
inadequate objective socialisation of labour direct allocation of
resources does not operate and the market is required to break up
monopolies). [4]

The despotic nature of planning from the First Five Year Plan onwards
meant that it was marked by colossal disproportions, the cumulative
effect of which in the end undermined even the very targets set by the
bureaucracy. The market or pseudo-market mechanisms used have always
lacked a proper foundation largely because there is no unified pricing
system and no stable currency. The double pricing system is an accurate
reflection of the hybrid dualism of the Soviet economy. [5]

Comrade Cliff’s analysis makes much of the importance of the world
market for the Soviet economy. But the world market is not some
disembodied Holy Ghost hovering above the clouds in order to create the
world, as the Bible boldly tells us. One of the essential contributions
that Marx and Marxism have brought to the social sciences is the
categorical rejection of any kind of reification of economic categories.
One of the essential gains of historical materialism is to discover
behind these categories relations between social groups (social classes
and major class fractions). The connections between them and the way
they struggle for their interests strips bare the secret of economic
categories, including that of the world market.

In this respect, the theory put forward by Trotsky and the Fourth
International, that the fate of the USSR and so of its economy has not
yet been definitely settled, is based on a precise understanding of
international class struggle in the 20th century. Cliffs theory largely
empties the interconnection between international class struggle and
what has happened in the USSR of its significance.

Trotsky predicted in 1905–6 that the imperialist chain would first break
in Russia because its proletariat was subjectively stronger than the
proletariat in Germany and other countries. Objectively, however, the
conditions for an advance towards socialism were infinitely worse in
Russia than in any of the major industrialised countries in the world.
Therefore either the victorious Russian revolution would join up with a
victorious revolution in some of these countries, in which case the
proletariat would retain political power. Or it would not, in which case
the Russian proletariat would lose political power.

But what would be the precise form of the counter-revolution in Russia?
Again, that did not depend first and foremost on the forces present in
that country alone, but on the relationship of social and political
forces at a world level. The imperialist bourgeoisie was strong enough
to prevent (or, what amounts to the same thing, the leadership of the
proletariat was too weak to ensure) the victory of the revolution in
Germany, Austria, Italy, Britain, France and Spain. It was not, however,
in a position to crush the world working class movement. Overall, it was
only strong enough to crush the workers’ movement in Germany and Spain
with the victory of fascism, but even that was only temporary.

Furthermore, the Russian bourgeoisie had been too weakened, and the
international bourgeoisie was too divided, to make a success of
restoring capitalism by civil war, foreign intervention or the direct
pressure of the world market. In part, this effort was neutralised by
the intervention and pressure of the world proletariat. [6] What
followed as a result was a relative world equilibrium of class forces.
These conditions meant that a political counter-revolution (Thermidor)
took place in Russia, but not a social one. The proletariat lost
political power but it was not an old or new capitalist class which
benefitted but, to use Marx’s formula, functionaries who rose from the
ranks of the working class itself.

In the long term, this relative equilibrium of class forces cannot last.
Either the international working class will make decisive moves forward
to socialist revolution in key countries of the world, in which case any
restoration of capitalism will become impossible in the USSR. Or the
world proletariat will experience crushing defeats, not necessarily in
the precise form of the Nazi victory in Germany but with similar
consequences, namely the elimination for a long period of its capacity
for resistance and collective and organised action. If that happens the
restoration of capitalism in the USSR is inevitable. Given this
perspective, the role of the Soviet working class itself, its capacity
to react, to resist and move onto the counter-offensive, will become
more and more important.

Chris Harman criticises us by quoting an extract from an article written
in 1956, in which we stated that the Soviet economy grows in a regular
rhythm and that this shows its superiority to the capitalist economy.
Extracting a single quotation on a topic which an author has written
about for more than 40 years is not a serious way to debate. We could
quite easily refer to ten or so passages in which we predicted that the
rate of growth in the Soviet economy would fall. One quotation will do:

The disproportion between the development of light industry and that of
heavy industry, which underlies the bureaucratic form of management, has
become a deep-going weakness in the economic system. Its repercussions
on the development of heavy industry itself ... are becoming bigger and
bigger. [7]

So have we changed our mind on this matter? Is there a contradiction in
our analysis? Not at all. The quotation and the method used by Harman
can be turned against him. If one examines the real growth curve of the
Soviet economy from 1928 onwards (excepting the years of Nazi aggression
against the USSR 1941–44), it will be seen: a) that growth really was
regular and uninterrupted; b) that unlike the capitalist economy the
USSR has experienced no recession, no crisis of overproduction leading
to an absolute fall in production, for more than 60 years [8], c) that
the rate of growth began to fall 20 years ago; d) that this fall may
become ‘zero growth’, but that there is no ‘law’ making this inevitable.
It so happens, then, that we did predict this fall in the rate of growth
and our analysis of the Soviet economy (and of Soviet society) accounts
perfectly for both aspects of the tendency.

Cliff’s explanation, on the other hand, starts from a confusion in
analysis and terminology and relies on false statistical data. Under
capitalism, the lash of competition and of class struggle leads
capitalists to increase the organic composition of capital. In the first
instance they replace living by dead labour, i.e. by machines, in order
to sell more cheaply on the market. In the second they can raise the
rate of surplus value by subjecting workers to the pressure of
unemployment. The rise in the organic composition of capital, and the
resultant tendency of the rate of profit to fall, are the consequence
and not the cause of this behaviour. The cause lies in the nature of the
system itself: production for the sake of profit. This takes us back
again to money-capital, which is the starting point for the reproduction
cycle of capital and its end point.

In other words, without competition between capitalist firms, none of
this dynamic would exist, or would only exist on an extremely limited
scale. [9] Marx was explicit on the subject. He writes in Volume 3 of
CAPITAL that without competition ‘the fire that keeps production alive’
(and a fortiori accumulation) would be extinguished. Let us add that
Marx believed that capitalism can only exist in the form of ‘many
capitals’, which in turn inevitably implies competition. Marx was also
quite unambiguous about the point that competition involves exchange,
that competition is only possible through exchange. So where is the
‘exchange’ between Soviet arms and imperialist goods?

The use of the term ‘military competition’ as equivalent to competition
for the realisation of profit arises from a characteristic semantic
confusion. In reality, for ‘military competition’ to be capitalist
competition, it must operate via the world market. That would mean the
USSR being forced to buy arms or the machines necessary for the
production of arms from abroad, which would mean that Soviet factories
producing these arms or machines would have to close if they worked at
too high a cost price. This has clearly not been the case in the USSR
for 70 years. Quite the contrary. No arms factory or factory making
machines for arms has closed, irrespective of whether costs were known
to be higher than those in the USA, Germany or Japan.

All this proves once again that the Soviet economy is not governed by
the law of value. And so one cannot speak of ‘competition’ with
capitalist countries in the economic Marxist sense of the word when
dealing with the arms race.

Do the figures quoted by Harman agree with reality? Not at all. What
they reflect is the systematic attempt to camouflage the reality of the
Soviet economy which the bureaucracy has carried out since the Stalin
era. This has misled both apologists like Maurice Dobb and critics like
Bordiga and Cliff. The aim of this mystification is to disguise the
essentially parasitic and wasteful role of bureaucratic management.

The theoretical error which allows this statistical falsification is the
reduction of the Soviet economy to a system having two instead of three
sectors (Department III includes unproductive consumption and
‘accumulation’, while Department I consists of means of production and
Department II of the means of consumption consumed by the producers,
that is to say productive consumption). With a two sector scheme,
productive and unproductive consumption, investment which leads to
expanded reproduction and investment which serves no economic purpose in
reproduction are carelessly added together and jumbled up.

Here is an example, deliberately chosen from outside armaments
production. When a steelmill produces bars of steel which ‘accumulate’
in warehouses (or, better still, in the open air) and remain there, one
cannot speak of ‘accumulation’ in any economic sense of the word. Using
the term ‘capital accumulation’ in this connection would make any real
capitalist laugh. It is clearly waste production from a social point of
view. It is also waste production from the point of view of those who
control the economy.

Sheer wastage of products and resources occupies an enormous space in
the Soviet economy. Calculation of its size is not easy, but the most
critical economists have put forward the figure of between 30 and 40
percent of available productive resources (including human resources: a
third of all paid hours of work result in no real production). Here we
have the ‘secret’ of the command economy, of pseudo- or semi-planning in
the USSR: it is Department III which is overexpanded, not Department I.

Let us take one concrete example among many. The USSR is the biggest
producer of chemical fertiliser in the world. It produces nearly as much
as the USA and Western Europe put together. Does this imply
overexpansion of Department I (chemical fertiliser, being a raw
material, is part of Department I)? Not at all. More than half this
production is lost ‘in transit’. It never reaches the user and so is
never incorporated into any force of production or reproduction. A
product of labour whose use value is not realised has no exchange value.
So asserts Marx for commodity production. To extend this analysis to any
society not governed by the law of value, to say it is simply a sheer
waste of social resources, is to echo the spirit of his thought still
more strongly. Such wastage has nothing to do with any supposed
‘allocation of productive resources by the law of value’ or with any
drive to ‘accumulate capital’.

Back will come the retort, but what about armaments production under
capitalism? Isn’t that also waste production of productive resources?
Wouldn’t capitalism which incorporates the arms race as a more or less
permanent feature be a capitalism which develops the forces of
destruction rather than the forces of production? [10] Our answer to
this objection is at several levels.

From the point of view of the individual capitalist firm involved in
arms production this is not waste. Such commodities find buyers in so
far as these buyers (the state or arms dealers) wish to realise their
use value. So they possess an exchange value which creates real profit.
Otherwise they wouldn’t be produced under capitalism anyway.

Isn’t what the firm producing arms finds ‘useful’ irrational, even
inhuman, from the social point of view? Undoubtedly. But this is
absolutely characteristic of capitalism. The contradiction between the
partial rationality and the global irrationality of economic activity is
developed to the extreme. [11] The same point can be made about drugs,
cigarettes, polluting automobiles, chemical fertilisers, nuclear power
stations, and so on.

Is arms production ‘unproductive’ from the point of view of the
capitalist economy as a whole? That is, doesn’t it fail to increase the
mass of surplus value, of profit-source and of capital, which is the
only definition of ‘productive’ from the point of view of capital as a
whole? Not necessarily. When a mass of productive resources lies idle
the effect of expanding Department III can be to mobilise these
resources and so increase the total mass of surplus value and of
profits. [12] That is clearly what happened in the United States from
1940 onwards. It would be absurd to deny that capitalism, and indeed
bourgeois American society, was more prosperous in 1944 (not to say in
1950) than in 1933.

Does that mean that capitalism has been transformed into a ‘waste
economy’? Only partially. Besides there is nothing new about this. Marx
already stated in the Grundrisse and in Capital that capitalism can only
develop the production of material wealth by simultaneously undermining
the two sources of all wealth: human productive force and nature. During
the rise of capitalism the ‘positive’ effects of growth outweighed the
destructive ones. In its period of decline, from 1914 at least, the
opposite has been the case. Yet growth since 1949 (in the USA since
1940) has not been any the less real. The extra amount of foodstuff,
textiles, medicines, housing and domestic appliances produced in the
last 40 years is genuine and colossal. To label this as ‘forces of
destruction’ is absurd, non-materialist and non-Marxist.

Should one conclude from this that it is a matter of indifference,
economically speaking, whether society produces means of destruction or
means of production? Such a conclusion is not justified either. The iron
laws of reproduction continue to operate in a commodity production
system of whatever type (including the partial commodity production
system of the USSR, as in any country in a period of transition between
capitalism and socialism).

One cannot produce wheat with teargas, dresses with tanks, or television
sets with rockets. The dimensions of Department III are bound to have
repercussions on the dimensions of Departments I and II. The utilisation
of any productive resource for the manufacture of armaments entails its
removal from production of the means of production and of consumption.
Production in Department III therefore cannot be developed beyond a
certain point without in the end reducing production in the other two
Departments, thereby strangling expanded reproduction and so the
accumulation of capital.

What is true of capitalist society is also true of pre-capitalist
society. And in as much as armaments production persists (or other forms
of wastage appear on a grand scale) it applies to post-capitalist
society as well.

For thousands of years in pre-capitalist societies, wars led to famine
and to an absolute decline in production which was temporary or long
lasting depending on the period and the circumstances. In the USSR the
over-expansion in Department III of armaments production and
unproductive expenses in general (above all administrative expenses, ie
the cost of the bureaucracy) puts a brake on the overall development of
material production.

In the end it even chokes off growth, including growth in the arms
sector. This is for two reasons: it takes away vital resources for the
development of Departments I and II; and it increases the producers’
dissatisfaction with their given level of consumption (even if this
rises in a modest way), such that their lack of concern about overall
production results becomes ever greater. Under capitalism, this lack of
concern is partly neutralised by fear of redundancy and unemployment,
something which has played no role in the USSR for more than half a
century. Instead, therefore, alongside each producer had to be placed a
supervisor, a foreman, a cop. Hence the enormously swollen size of the
‘petty’ bureaucracy, amounting to about 20 million people, it can be
reckoned, since Trotsky’s time. Hence also the colossal and permanent
growth of unproductive expense: Department III is biting its own tail
like the legendary serpent.

This mechanism cannot be ‘reformed’, as Gorbachev has discovered to his
cost. The serpent can only be slain by the spread of strictly public,
popular working class control, and by the spread of genuine working
class management in a multiparty socialist democracy.

A schematic system of thought which only operates in black and red and
which is the prisoner of outrageously simplistic abstractions is
incapable of handling the categories of ‘transition’, of ‘combined and
uneven development’ and of ‘contradictory reality’. In other words, such
thought is undialectical. This unfortunately is the way in which Tony
Cliff and Chris Harman think, at least when dealing with general
problems.

Moreover there is something irrational, even positively irresponsible,
in the SWP comrades’ vituperative attacks on accelerated
industrialisation in the USSR from 1927 onwards. This is clear to the
naked eye for every worker, peasant and Marxist from Third World
countries, and for every true internationalist.

Each one of us is against ‘overinvestment’, against ‘gigantism’, against
Stalinist and post-Stalinist ‘superindustrialisation’, most of which
represent a total loss of expenditure in material resources. But we are
not against accelerated industrialisation as such in these countries or
in Russia, which was the first to opt for it, after the October
revolution. To turn one’s back on this industrialisation would mean not
just rejecting the whole short and medium term trend in economic policy
elaborated by Lenin, Trotsky and the Left Opposition after 1923. Above
all it would mean condemning those countries to flounder in barbarism
while they wait for the victory of the world revolution. But when would
that come about? After five years? After ten years? After 20 years?
After 30 years? Who knows? Must we in the meantime fold our arms and
tolerate the intolerable?

When we speak of intolerable barbarism we are not speaking loosely.
Underdevelopment kills 16 million children in the Third World each year.
How many children would die each year if development took place in these
countries on the basis of a democratically run socialised economy? The
_Generalplan Ost_ of Nazi-led German imperialism envisaged the
extermination of 100 million people in central and Eastern Europe. Was
it wrong not to have laid down conditions for successful resistance
against this projected monstrous crime, notably by developing a powerful
industry in the Urals and beyond? By rejecting a sense of proportion
(the difference between necessary accelerated industrialisation and
disproportionate, wasteful and destructive superindustrialisation),
which breaks with dialectical thinking, the SWP comrades put themselves
in an impossible situation with respect to their own objectives.

Let us suppose that one day they succeed in leading the British working
class to a seizure of power. What type of society would emerge from this
victorious revolution? A socialist society? Have the SWP comrades been
suddenly converted to the reactionary Utopia of socialism in one
country? A state capitalist society because of ‘the pressure of
competition from the world market’? Workers’ power would scarcely be in
a position to counter this pressure in Great Britain alone. Would their
efforts then have been in vain? A socialist society by virtue of the
fact that the British revolution would immediately spread to the rest of
the world? But if that does not happen, or at least not for some time,
wouldn’t Britain then be a transitional society between capitalism and
socialism which all advanced workers and communists/socialists would
unite in an effort to protect from the dangers of bureaucratisation,
even if they couldn’t eliminate them entirely? What is the point of
rejecting today the very concept which one would be forced to apply
tomorrow? And wouldn’t the funds for accumulation, productive as well as
unproductive, have to be sufficient to meet (at least partially) the
requirements to invest in order to satisfy the needs of the masses and
to defend them against imperialism?

Wouldn’t reducing this whole complex problematic simply to the question
of the ‘pressure of the world market’ result in paralysis, even suicide,
for the SWP and for any victorious British revolution? In the imperfect
world in which we live it is impossible to find one’s bearings or to act
in a revolutionary manner without resorting to such categories as
‘transition’, ‘transitional programme’, ‘transitional demands’ and
‘transitional society’. The all or nothing approach acts as a blindfold.
It also inhibits revolutionary action, no matter how limited in effect.
 

The specific character of the Soviet bureaucracy

According to Cliff and Harman, the Soviet bureaucracy is characterised
by the tendency to excess production of the means of production, the
tendency to ‘production for the sake of production’. The idea which they
object to (and attribute to us) is the claim that the economic
development of the USSR is dominated by the production of consumption
goods (luxury goods) for the bureaucracy. We have never defended such an
extreme thesis. In no society (including slave or feudal society) does
what motivates the ruling class or group – the desire to increase its
own consumption – explain or exhaust the dynamic of the economy as a
whole.

In order to preserve and extend its privileges, the Soviet bureaucracy,
just like any ruling class or group in history, has to develop the
economy up to a certain point. Without car factories 3 million middle
and top bureaucrats cannot acquire cars. Without enough steel,
electricity or iron ore, the car industry cannot be developed
satisfactorily. True, one could try and import these goods. But that
would mean having to export in order to obtain resources, which would
mean submitting to the law of value and to the world market. In that
situation an underdeveloped country remains basically an underdeveloped
country, unable either to industrialise beyond a certain limit or buy a
sufficient number of cars.

In order to avoid just this kind of constraint (to escape the
constraints of the world market), the Soviet bureaucracy unleashed a
process of ‘superindustrialisation’ in the USSR. Without this, it could
not have defended, consolidated or extended its powers and privileges as
spectacularly as it did after 1928.

This is the framework necessary to understand the socio-political
struggles that have taken place in the USSR over the last 60 years. The
struggle has been three way, not two way (‘between capital and labour’).
When the profound crises of 1928–33, 1941–44 and 1945–48 shook Soviet
society and the power of the bureaucracy, on every occasion the
bureaucracy struck simultaneously at both the bourgeoisie and the
working class. It did the same in Eastern Europe. It did not simply
‘overexploit the working class’, it also expropriated the bourgeoisie.
Historically it has played an autonomous role.

The real theoretical debate turns on the extent of this relative
autonomy and how long it can last. For believers in the theory of
‘bureaucratic collectivism’, this autonomy is identical with that of a
ruling class in history. For Trotsky, as for us, it is much more
limited, both in time and scope. But that does not make it any the less
genuine, much more genuine than the majority of Marxists thought
possible before 1927. To persist in ignoring this today is to deprive
oneself of an explanation of what has actually happened in the USSR
since then.

The fourth great crisis in the history of the bureaucratised USSR is now
unfolding. It remains to be seen whether the three way struggle
continues (we think it will), or whether, as many commentators and
tendencies believe, the _nomenklatura_ will go over into the camp of the
international bourgeoisie lock, stock and barrel and become its resident
junior partner (very junior: look at the GDR!).

Be that as it may, ends and means have to be clearly distinguished in
this complex social struggle: what the fundamental driving force is,
what means are used to fulfil the ends chosen, and what the objective
results are of the interaction between ends and means. And here we are
forced to return to the conclusion – a conclusion moreover which
corresponds to Marx’s definition – that only under the lash of
competition has the bourgeoisie a permanent and lasting stake in the
continuous expansion of production. Without this constant pressure, no
pre-capitalist ruling class showed any such tendency (nor, we would add,
does the bureaucratic caste in the USSR).

As long as the shortage of consumption goods kept them thirsty for more,
the bureaucrats were fanatical about accumulation, about ‘production for
the sake of production’ and about ‘technological progress’ (as sections
of the middle bureaucracy, in their greed for an American yuppie
lifestyle, still are today). But as soon as the _nomenklatura_ as a
whole had reached a satisfactory level of consumption (‘when socialism
had been achieved for its benefit’) this thirst began to disappear.
‘Productivist fanaticism’ dwindled. A stage of what the Hungarian
Stalinist ex-prime minister, Hegedus, correctly called ‘generalised
irresponsibility’ set in.

This also explains why Soviet managers, unlike their capitalist
counterparts, nearly always and almost automatically give in to wage
demands in the workplace: no pressure of competition forces them to
‘extract the maximum surplus value’ from the workers. The only pressure
they are under is to ‘avoid problems’ when it comes to fulfilling the
plan. It is in order to bring about a thorough change in their attitude
that Gorbachev and his ilk have been trying to introduce all the
technocratic changes of perestroika. However, as the most consistent
supporters of perestroika and of out and out ‘economic liberalisation’,
both East and West, have clearly understood, radical ‘structural reform’
cannot be fulfilled without a massive return to private property.

Without competition and the drive to private accumulation which it sets
in motion the behaviour of the bureaucrats in the East will in essence
never be like that of capitalist bosses. At best they will act like
gangsters trying to legalise theft and extortion (‘trying to go legit’).
And if they embark on all out privatisation, which would mean making
tens of millions of people unemployed in the USSR, they will have to
break the resistance of the working class.

This proves that a genuine ‘three way struggle’ is still taking place in
the USSR. It proves that, despite everything, workers still have at
least two ‘gains’ from the October revolution to defend: more than half
a century of uninterrupted full employment (which has never existed in
capitalist society and never will exist); and the abolition of private
property in large scale production, without which this full employment
cannot be achieved.

By dogmatically and unrealistically defining the bureaucracy as a
‘capitalist class’ the SWP comrades are unable to grasp what is specific
about the Soviet bureaucracy. The bureaucracy differs from the bourgeois
class, indeed from all ruling classes in history, by virtue of the fact
that the income of those classes (its portion of the social product) is
variable, while that of the bureaucrats is fixed. The annual profits of
the bourgeoisie depend on the annual fluctuations in profit and
production. The annual feudal rent depended on annual fluctuations in
the harvests. The annual income of the bureaucrat depends on his (or
her) position in the hierarchy. If that position does not change, the
income does not change either, except marginally.

Hence the conservatism, inertia and ‘irresponsibility’ of the
bureaucracy in stark contrast to the behaviour of the capitalist
entrepreneur. The latter behaves differently not because he is ‘more
aggressive’ or ‘more rational’, ‘better’ or ‘worse’ than the bureaucrat,
or more of an ‘individualist’. He does so because capitalist competition
means that the struggle over the distribution of the mass of surplus
value and profit is never eliminated, which means his share of it can
never be guaranteed. If he slips up on the path of ‘technological
progress’ or of ‘labour organisation’ the inevitable consequence will be
a fall in his share, if not bankruptcy.

Nothing of what glasnost has come to reveal about the reality of the
Soviet economy has had any light shed on it by the myths of ‘state
capitalism’, myths which are only the reverse side of the Stalinist coin
about the ‘achievements of socialist industrialisation’. All can be
explained in the light of the analysis made by Trotsky and the Fourth
International of Soviet society and the Soviet economy, and of the
analysis underpinning it of the specific nature of the Soviet
bureaucracy.

Harman claims that nowhere in history has a section of the producing
class been involved in the ‘maximum extraction of surplus labour’ from
the producers themselves. Without doubt, the Soviet bureaucracy is an
unprecedented phenomenon historically. But the October revolution and
the creation of the isolated Russian workers’ state were also new
phenomena lacking historical precedent (the Paris Commune lasted only a
few months). People with a scientific and undogmatic outlook should not
be surprised if a new historical development throws up new and
unexpected by-products.

Let us turn to the question of ‘maximum extraction of surplus labour’.
The proportion of working class consumption in the USSR is much bigger
than in Brazil, to take just one example of a country engaged in
accelerated industrialisation (not that of working class and middle
class consumption put together: the middle classes consume ten times
more than workers and account for 20 percent of the population).

Let us call to mind a simple analogy (which is not to say it is
identical, just analogous). For any socialist or trade unionist in 1848
or 1890 the idea of socialist party leaders or reactionary trade union
leaders acting so as to objectively increase the ‘extraction of surplus
labour from the producers’ would have appeared literally unthinkable.
Yet that is what social democratic leaders have done since 1914, and a
good number of trade union leaders since even before that date. Should
one therefore refuse to call social democratic parties workers’ parties?
Have they become bourgeois parties, identical with the Conservatives and
the Liberals? Is it possible to engage in class politics in Europe or
Japan without having to defend these parties against the bourgeoisie’s
attempts to weaken or even periodically crush them?

Must the mass trade unions under the leadership of reformist traitors be
considered as yellow bosses’ unions? The ultra left have long defended
this absurd idea, which the SWP comrades reject as far as Great Britain
is concerned. But why, if it is conceivable to defend the SPD against
fascism, despite its being led by the Noskes, the assassins of Karl
Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg, is it ‘inconceivable’ to defend the USSR
against imperialism?

Chris Harman claims that two arguments we successively put forward about
the bureaucracy are mutually incompatible. The first is that the
bureaucracy is not a ruling class; the second is that it controls and
distributes the bulk of the social surplus in the USSR. But this
incompatibility yet again reflects a formalist, schematic and
simplistically dogmatic manner of thinking.

There have been many cases in history where powerful social layers
controlled and distributed the bulk of the surplus despite not being the
ruling class. For to be a ruling class involves appropriating the
surplus, which is not necessarily the same as controlling or
distributing it. The mandarins at the height of the Chinese Empire and
the imperial bureaucracy in the late Roman Empire were by and large in
control of the centralisation and distribution of the social surplus.
But for all that they were not the ruling classes in these two
societies, because they did not appropriate the major share of the
surplus. At the end of the Third Reich, the Nazi military bureaucracy
certainly controlled the distribution of what was produced socially. But
it was in no sense the ruling class, since the bulk of the social
surplus continued to be appropriated by the capitalist class. The events
which followed showed who was master and who, despite the appearance of
omnipotence, only carried out orders.

Future events will similarly demonstrate that the Soviet bureaucracy
will only be able to become a ruling class by appropriating to itself
the social surplus and the means of production, that is to say, by
turning into ‘old fashioned’ capitalists who own a good chunk of the
large scale means of production.
 

A fear that has proved groundless

When he decided to break with the interpretation of Soviet society
formulated by Trotsky and defended by the Fourth International, Tony
Cliff predicted that those who continued to call the USSR a
bureaucratically degenerated workers’ state would be led to capitulate
to Stalinism, in particular to side with the bureaucracy against workers
in revolt. (Incidentally, let us recall that as early as Stalin’s death,
if not from 1948 onwards, we predicted such revolts.)

Subsequent events have proved this prediction to be groundless. Neither
the Fourth International, nor any of its sections, nor any of its
leading representatives, has even once lined up ‘on the side of the
bureaucracy against the masses in revolt’. We all gave 100 percent
support to the workers’ uprising in the GDR in 1953, to the 1956
Hungarian revolution, to the Polish workers’ struggles in the same year,
to the Prague Spring’s resistance in 1968–69 to the Soviet invasion, to
the rise of Solidarnosc in 1980–81 and to its subsequent struggle
against Jaruzelski’s military coup in Poland, and to the uprisings in
China and Eastern Europe in 1989.

Chris Harman recognises this, moreover. In embarrassment he falls back
on the assertion that we nevertheless might have expressed a
‘preference’ for the Gomulka style method of reform in 1956 to that of
the Hungarian revolution. This is slander. Harman will not be able to
find a single quotation to back up his accusation. We have been
supporters of a political revolution – a revolution involving large
scale independent mass action and self-organisation – ever since we
began to take part in debates on the ‘nature of the USSR’ (i.e. since
1945–6), and remain so. We have never budged an inch from this position.
But the reality of the political mass struggles in the USSR, Eastern
Europe and like societies cannot be reduced to struggles between the
masses and the bureaucracy.

In the USSR, Eastern Europe, China, Cuba and Nicaragua, the struggles of
the last 50 years have also taken place between, on the one hand, these
states and the masses in these countries and, on the other, the
imperialist powers. The theory of state capitalism has been no kind of
guide in these conflicts, to say the least. Its internal logic would
necessarily lead one to view most of these conflicts as interimperialist
and take an absentionist, ‘third camp’ position (which is what Cliff
adopted in the Korean War and which at least some of his followers were
tempted to do in the Bay of Pigs conflict). It is true that during the
Vietnamese War he took a more correct position, but one in flagrant
contradiction to the logic of the theory of ‘state capitalism’.

In these conflicts the popular masses of those countries, starting with
the workers, did not remain neutral. They lined up against imperialism,
despite their hatred of Stalin and his heirs. In practice they applied
Trotsky’s line of military defence of the USSR (and the other
bureaucratised workers’ states) against imperialism. They did so in the
USSR, in Yugoslavia, in China, in Vietnam, in Cuba and in Nicaragua. In
these confrontations, which involved tens of millions of workers, the
attitude adopted by the few followers of the theory of ‘state
capitalism’ was at best confused and contradictory, at worst plainly
counterrevolutionary. If Soviet workers had had the misfortune to follow
these false guides, none of us would be alive today and no independent
workers’ organisation would exist in Europe, if not in other continents.
The triumph of Nazi barbarism would have destroyed them.
 

The vicious circle of sectarianism

The tendency led by Tony Cliff (from which the SWP came) has seen its
main task ever since its birth as spreading the theory of ‘state
capitalism’. This is the characteristic mark of a sect as defined by
Marx: in order to justify its existence it constructs a shibboleth out
of a particular doctrine and subordinates its activity to the defence of
that shibboleth.

This sectarian deviation has its own logic from which it is almost
impossible to escape. In Britain itself the SWP comrades have been
partially protected from the worst sins of sectarianism because of their
real roots in the working class and because of the size of their
organisation: any type of irresponsible behaviour is impossible when
acting under the critical gaze of thousands. But even in Britain the
sectarian frame of mind has damaged and continues to damage the SWP,
particularly in its approach to those mass movements which it considers
‘non-proletarian’ and carelessly dubs ‘petty bourgeois’. This derives
from the same inability to grasp the notion of combined development
which arises as a transitional phenomenon, particularly in the sphere of
class consciousness. It is the same ‘all or nothing’ attitude which lies
at the heart of the theory of ‘state capitalism’.

Sectarianism has especially damaged the SWP’s international work in
another way. The theory of state capitalism means that it is powerless
to grasp the full progressive dynamic of the mass anti-imperialist
movements in the Third World. According to that theory, these movements
can only lead in the end to the creation of new state capitalist states.
Their dynamic is a purely ‘nationalistic’ one. The entire strategy of
permanent revolution – total support for the anti-imperialist struggle
while fighting for the political class independence of the proletariat;
a struggle for proletarian hegemony inside the movement; striving to
ensure that in solving its national-democratic tasks the revolution
grows over into making a start on solving its socialist-proletarian ones
– is in fact rejected or minimalised by the leadership of the SWP.

In other imperialist countries besides Britain, the followers of the SWP
mostly content themselves with forming grouplets to propagate the theory
of state capitalism, which are incapable, if only because of their tiny
size, of intervening in genuine class struggle. Sectarian interests take
precedence over class interests. The same applies in the states of
Eastern Europe, which are in complete social and political turmoil. In
the COMMUNIST MANIFESTO Marx and Engels provided the classic definition
of what communists have to do:

They have no interests separate and apart from those of the proletariat
as a whole.

They do not set up any special principles [in the 1888 English edition
Engels preferred to insert ‘sectarian principles’] of their own, by
which to shape and mould the proletarian movement.

The communists are distinguished from the other working class parties by
this only: 1 In the national struggles of the proletarians of the
different countries, they point out and bring to the front the common
interests of the entire proletariat, independently of all nationality. 2
In the various stages of development which the struggle of the working
class against the bourgeoisie has to pass through, they always and
everywhere represent the interests of the movement as a whole.

The Communists, therefore, are on the one hand, practically, the most
advanced and resolute section of the working class parties of every
country, that section which pushes forward all others; on the other
hand, theoretically, they have over the great mass of the proletariat
the advantage of clearly understanding the tine of march, the
conditions, and the ultimate general results of the proletarian
movement.

The SWP is no different from the Fourth International when it comes to
‘understanding the line of march, the conditions, and the ultimate
general results of the proletarian movement’ in Eastern Europe and the
USSR: the proletariat organises itself to conquer power through
multiparty, democratically elected Soviets, with the perspective of
constructing a classless society internationally.

But the followers of the SWP do not draw the obvious conclusion that a
separate organisation of state caps is unjustified in these Eastern
European countries. They do not see that the task of any revolutionary
there is to help advanced workers and intellectuals battle on two
fronts, against the bureaucracy and against restorationist forces.
Instead of defending the interests of the proletariat as a whole, which
above all demands the (re)creation of class independence (no easy
matter), the followers of the SWP concentrate on stirring up an
artificial distinction from every other revolutionary current – a
distinction exclusively based on acceptance of the dogma of ‘state
capitalism’, their sectarian shibboleth.

That can only reinforce the image of revolutionary Marxists as
scholastic dogmatists, as hopeless ‘splitters’, which first Stalinists
and then neo-Stalinists and neo-social democrats have systematically
spread in these countries in order to discredit revolutionary Marxists
(and increasingly these days Marxism itself). This image is
counterproductive. It weakens the real possibilities that Marxists have
in these countries, not to found sects, but to become the major pole of
attraction for the militant left inside the workers’ movement as it
reconstructs itself.

Fortunately the negative effect of this will remain limited, both
because of the theoretical, political and organisational strength which
the Fourth International has already gained (its influence is real there
in a way that the SWP’s is not), and because of the understanding and
experience that the best indigenous forces springing up in those
countries have progressively accumulated that the role played there by
the SWP clearly illustrates the negative repercussions of sectarianism.

This sectarianism has made the SWP incapable of making any progress
towards the construction of an international organisation. Sects can
only link up with mini-sects which they closely control.
Organisationally, their sectarianism prevents them linking up with
substantial, autonomous revolutionary bodies in an important number of
countries. Politically, this is because they fail to understand the real
process of mass struggle in most countries in the world. The SWP is
essentially, then, a national-communist organisation, which is forced to
fob its members off by trying to create grouplets in a few countries.

After 40 years experience our record in this respect cannot be faulted.
The Fourth International exists for real as the one and only world
organisation. It is, of course, still small, too small, and is far from
being the mass revolutionary international for which it is working and
of which it will constitute just one element. However, it is much
stronger than in 1938 or than in 1948, both in numbers, in rootedness in
the workplace and unions, and in geographical terms. It exists in 50
countries or so. Some of its sections and sympathising organisations
play a genuine part in the workers’ movement and the mass movement in
their respective countries, which is recognised by all. It acts and will
continue to act in a non-sectarian fashion, on the basis laid down above
in the COMMUNIST MANIFESTO.

It can do so because it represents the one current in the international
workers’ movement which takes on the unconditional and uncompromising
defence of the interests of the workers and the oppressed in the three
sectors of the world revolution – the imperialist countries, the
countries under bureaucratic dictatorship and the so called Third World
countries – without anywhere subordinating this defence to any supposed
‘priorities’. This is what allows the building at one and the same time
of national revolutionary organisations and of an international
revolutionary organisation. In this respect, an understanding, based on
the theory of permanent revolution, on the Trotskyist analysis of
Stalinism, on THE TRANSITIONAL PROGRAMME and on the ‘dialectic of the
three sectors of the world revolution’, of what has happened, and is
happening in the USSR, in the Third World and in the organised workers’
movement in the imperialist countries, has proved both operational and
effective.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

1. Bordiga, who advanced a different variant from Cliff’s about ‘state
capitalism’ in the USSR, predicted that a general crisis of
overproduction was going to occur in that country. He even announced the
precise year in which it would break out. The year came and has long
since gone. The general crisis of overproduction in the USSR is still
awaited ...

2. The SWP comrades did not at all predict the overproduction crises of
1974–75 and 1980–82. We did so almost to the year in which they broke
out.

3. It is another matter to know what period of time is needed for the
process to have some chance of completion.

4. See the perfectly clear statement by Trotsky in THE SOVIET ECONOMY IN
DANGER (1932).

5. It would be better to add, the triple or quadruple pricing system,
for account must be taken of black market prices and of the ‘prices’
(comparative advantages) of the ‘grey market’ (exchange of services).

6. In addition the growing importance of the mass liberation movements
in the colonial and semi-colonial countries from 1925–28 onwards should
be included.

7. Written in 1960, MARXIST ECONOMIC THEORY (first edition, Merlin
Press), p. 598: ‘At the same time the rates of industrial expansion had
to be reduced’, IBID. (second edition, 1969).

8. Aganbegyan claims that there was one year of absolute decline in
production under Brezhnev. This is contradicted by every other source.

9. Complete and permanent monopolies are impossible under capitalism.
The very divergence between their rates of profit and those in other
branches inevitably attracts capital towards the sector that has been
monopolised.

10. The Lambertists believe this.

11. We devoted one entire chapter in LATE CAPITALISM to developing this
idea.

12. This is the ‘rational kernel’ of Keynesian and neo-Keynesian
theories, which in every other respect are wrong.

 
Top of the page

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 15 December 2016

Save
