Rosa Luxemburg
Theory & Practice
[A polemic against Comrade Kautsky’s theory of the Mass Strike]
(1910)


Part 1

The first question which the interest of party circles demands in our present 
dispute is this: whether discussion of the mass strike was obstructed in the 
party press, namely in Vorwärts and the Neue Zeit. Comrade Kautsky denies this, 
asserting that it would “naturally never have occurred to him to wish to 
‘forbid’ discussion of the mass strike.”[A] Comrade Kautsky wishes to 
misunderstand me. We are obviously not concerned with a veto of Comrade 
Kautsky’s – a single editor cannot “forbid” anything – but with a veto by the 
“high command” of his original acceptance of my article, which was obeyed by 
Comrade Kautsky in his sphere of influence the Neue Zeit.

As for the other question – propaganda for a republic – here Comrade Kautsky 
also denies that he obstructed me. “That would never have occurred to him. “ 
All that was involved was one passage about a republic in my mass strike 
article, “whose wording seemed inexpedient” to the editors of the Neue Zeit. I 
myself then had my article published in the Dortmund Arbeiter-Zeitung. “But in 
vain will one search this article for that passage about a republic.” Comrade 
Kautsky has “not noticed” that I had published this passage somewhere else. 
“The cowardly veiling of principles with which Comrade Luxemburg reproaches us, 
“ he concludes, “is therefore reduced to this: that we objected to one passage 
in her article, which she herself has voluntarily dropped since then. Such 
strategy is no piece of heroism, Octavia!”

In this representation of the facts, which places me in such a ridiculous 
light, Comrade Kautsky has fallen victim to singular errors. In reality it was 
not at all a question of “one passage” and the possible danger of its 
“wording”: it was a question of the content, of the slogan of a republic and 
the agitation for it – and Comrade Kautsky must excuse me, in the precarious 
position in which his presentation of the case has left me, if I call upon him 
as chief witness and rescuer in my greatest need. Comrade Kautsky wrote me this 
after he received my mass strike article:

``Your article is very beautiful and very important, I am not in agreement with 
everything and reserve the right to polemize against it. Today I don’t have 
time to do so in writing. Enough, I gladly accept the article if you delete 
pages 29 to the end. Under no circumstances could I print this. Even your point 
of departure is false. There is not one word in our program about a republic. 
Not out of oversight, not because of editorial caprice, but on well-considered 
grounds. Likewise the Gotha Program said nothing of a republic, and Marx, as 
much as he condemned this program, acknowledged in his letter that it wouldn’t 
do to openly demand a republic (Neue Zeit, 1, p.573). Engels spoke on the same 
matter regarding the Erfurt Program (Neue Zeit, XX, 1, p.11) [B]

I don’t have time to set forth to you the grounds which Marx and Engels, Bebel 
and Liebknecht acknowledged to be sound. Enough, that what you want is an 
entirely new agitation which until now has always been rejected. This new 
agitation, however, is the sort we have no business discussing so openly. With 
your article you want to proclaim on your own hook, as a single individual, an 
entirely new agitation which the party has always rejected. We cannot and will 
not proceed in this manner. A single personality, however high she may stand, 
cannot pull off a fait accompli on her own hook which can have unforeseeable 
consequences for the party.``

It goes on in the same vein for about another two pages.

The “entirely new agitation, “ which could have “unforeseeable consequences” 
for the party, had the following wording:

``Universal, equal direct suffrage for all adults, without distinction of sex, 
is the immediate goal which ensures us the enthusiastic agreement of the 
broadest strata at the present moment. But this goal is not the only one which 
we must now preach. As long as we answer the infamous electoral reform bungling 
of the government and the bourgeois parties by proclaiming the slogan of a 
truly democratic electoral system, we still find ourselves – taking the 
political situation as a whole – on the defensive. In accord with the good old 
principle of every real battle tactic, that a powerful blow is the best 
defense, we must answer the ever more insolent provocations of the reigning 
reaction by turning the tables in our agitation and going over to a sharp 
attack all along the line. This can be done in the most visible, clear, and so 
to speak, lapidary form if our agitation clearly champions the following 
demand, which the first point our political program leads to: the demand for a 
republic.

Up till now the watchword republic has played a limited role in our agitation. 
There were good reasons for this: our party wished to save the German working 
class from those bourgeois, or rather petty bourgeois republican illusions 
which were (for example) so disastrous in the history of French socialism, and 
still are today. From the beginning, the proletarian struggle in Germany was 
consistently and resolutely directed not against this or that form and 
excrescence of class society in particular, but against class society as such; 
instead of splintering into anti-militarism, anti-monarchism, and other petty 
bourgeois “isms,” it constantly built itself as anti-capitalism, mortal enemy 
of the existing order in all its excrescences and forms, whether under the 
cloak of monarchy or republic. And through forty years’ radical labor of 
enlightenment, we have succeeded in making this conviction the enduring 
possession of the awakened German proletariat: that the best bourgeois republic 
is no less a class state and bulwark of capitalist exploitation than the 
present monarchy, and that only the abolition of the wage system and class rule 
in every form, and not the outward show of “popular sovereignty” in a bourgeois 
republic, can materially alter the condition of the proletariat.

Well then, it is just because the forty-year labor of Social Democracy has been 
such a fundamental prophylaxis against the dangers of republican petty 
bourgeois illusions in Germany that today we can calmly make a place in our 
agitation for the foremost principle of our political program, a place that is 
its due by right. By pushing forward the republican character of Social 
Democracy we win, above all, one more opportunity to illustrate in a palpable, 
popular fashion our principled opposition as a class party of the proletariat 
to the united camp of all bourgeois parties. For the frightening downfall of 
bourgeois liberalism in Germany is revealed most drastically in its Byzantine 
genuflection to the monarchy, in which liberal burgerdom runs only a nose 
behind conservative Junkerdom.

But this is not enough. The general state of Germany’s domestic and foreign 
politics in recent years points to the monarchy as the center, or at least the 
outward, visible head of the reigning reaction. The semi-absolute monarchy with 
its personal authority has formed for a quarter century, and with every year 
more so, the stronghold of militarism, the driving force of battleship 
diplomacy, the leading spirit of geopolitical adventure, just as it has been 
the shield of Junkerdom in Prussia and the bulwark of the ascendancy of 
Prussia’s political backwardness in the entire Reich: it is finally, so to 
speak, the personal sworn foe of the working class and Social Democracy.

In Germany, the slogan of a republic is thus infinitely more than the 
expression of a beautiful dream of democratic “peoples’ government,” or 
political doctrinairism floating in the clouds: it is a practical war cry 
against militarism, navalism, colonialism, geopolitics, Junker rule, the 
Prussianization of Germany; it is only a consequence and drastic summation of 
our daily battle against all individual manifestations of the reigning 
reaction. In particular, the most recent events point straight in the same 
direction: Junkerdom’s threats in the Reichstag of an absolutist coup d’etat 
and the Reich Chancellor’s insolent attacks on Reichstag voting rights in the 
Prussian Landtag, as well as the redemption of the “royal pledge” on the 
question of Prussian suffrage through the Bethmann reform bill.``

With a clear conscience I can here set forth this “entirely new agitation,” as 
it has already appeared in print without causing the party the slightest injury 
in body and soul. Although I had agreed (with a sigh, to be sure, but with 
resignation) to delete the section on the republic, Comrade Kautsky finally 
returned the whole mass strike article to me. Without altering a word I 
published the interdicted pages “29 to the end,” furnished with an introduction 
and conclusion, as a self-sufficient article in the Breslau Volkswacht of March 
25 under the title A Time for Sowing: whereupon it was reprinted by a string of 
party papers – to my recollection in Dortmund, Bremen, Halle, Elberfeld, 
Königsberg, and in Thuringian papers. That is certainly no piece of heroism on 
my part: it’s just my tough luck that Comrade Kautsky’s reading of the party 
press at that time was as desultory as his consideration of the party’s 
position regarding the slogan of a republic. If he had, let us say, more 
maturely considered the subject, he could not possibly have mobilized Marx and 
Engels against me on the question of a republic. Engels’ article to which 
Kautsky refers is the critique of the party leadership’s draft of the Erfurt 
Program of 1891. Here Engels says in Section II, Political Demands:

``The draft’s political demands have one great flaw. What actually should have 
been said is not there. If all these ten demands were conceded we would indeed 
have diverse further means to carry the main political point, but in no way the 
main point itself.``

Engels substantiates the urgent need to clarify this “main point” of Social 
Democracy’s political demands with an allusion to the “opportunism prevalent in 
a great part of the Social Democratic press.” Then he continues:

``What then are these ticklish, but very essential points?

First. If anything is certain, it is this: that our party and the working class 
can only come to power under the form of a democratic republic. This is even 
the specific form for the dictatorship of the proletariat, as the great French 
Revolution has already shown. It is surely unthinkable that our best people 
should, like Miquel, become ministers under a Kaiser. At present it seems that 
legally, it won’t do to set a demand for a republic directly in the program – 
although this was admissible even under Louis Philippe in France, just as it 
now is in Italy. But the fact that one cannot even draw up an openly republican 
party program in Germany proves how colossal the illusion is, that we can 
genially, peacefully install a republic there – and not only a republic, but 
communist society.

In any case, for the time being we can side-step the question of a republic. 
But in my opinion, what should and can be included is the demand for 
concentration of all political power in the hands of the people’s 
representatives. And for the present that would be sufficient, if one can go no 
further.

Second. The reconstitution of Germany ...

So, then, a unified republic ...

On all these subjects, not much can be said in the program. I call this to your 
attention chiefly to characterize both the situation in Germany, where it will 
not do say such things, and the self-delusion that would transform this 
situation into a communist society by legal means. And further, to remind the 
party executive that there are still more weighty political questions besides 
direct legislation by the people and the free administration of justice before 
we reach the end. With the universal instability any of these questions could 
catch fire overnight: and what then, if we have never discussed, never come to 
an understanding on them.``

We see that Engels perceives “one great flaw” in the party program: that it 
does not include the demand for a republic, solely on the basis of categorical 
representations from Germany that, for political reasons, such things were out 
of the question. With visible discomfort and various misgivings, he decides to 
bite the sour apple and “in any case” to “sidestep” the demand for a republic. 
But what he unqualifiedly declares to be essential is discussion of the slogan 
of a republic in the party press:

``You there can judge better than I can here, whether it is possible to further 
formulate the above-mentioned points as program demands. But it would be 
desirable that these questions be debated within the party before it is too 
late. [Neue Zeit XX, 1, pp.11-12.]``

This “political testament” of Friedrich Engels was, let us say, peculiarly 
interpreted by Comrade Kautsky when he banned discussion of the necessity of 
agitation for a republic from the Neue Zeit as an “entirely new agitation” 
which allegedly “until now has always been rejected by the party.”

As for Marx, in his critique of the Gotha Program he went so far as to declare 
that if it were not possible to openly advance a republic as the program’s 
foremost political demand, then all the demands for democratic details should 
have been omitted as well. He wrote, regarding the Gotha Program:

``Its political demands include nothing beyond the old, well-known democratic 
litany: universal suffrage, direct legislation, human rights, a people’s 
militia, etc. ...

But one thing has been forgotten. Since the German workers’ party expressly 
declares that it acts within “the present nation state,” and hence its own 
state, the Prusso-German Empire ..., it should not have forgotten the main 
point: that all these pretty little things rest on recognition of the so-called 
“popular sovereignty,” that they are therefore only appropriate to a democratic 
republic. Since you do not feel yourselves in the position – and wisely, for 
the circumstances demand caution[1] – to demand a democratic republic as the 
French workers’ programs did under Louis Philippe and Louis Napoleon, you 
should not have tried to hide behind the . . . dodge [the dots are substituted 
for a boisterous adjective of Marx’s – R.L.] of demanding things which only 
make sense in a democratic republic, from a state which is nothing but a 
military despotism embellished with parliamentary forms, alloyed with a feudal 
admixture, obviously influenced by the bourgeoisie, shored up with a 
bureaucracy, and watched over by the police.

Even vulgar democracy which sees the millennium in the democratic republic and 
has no suspicion, that it is in just this last state form of bourgeois society 
that the class struggle will be fought out to the end – even it towers 
mountain-high over this sort of democratism within the limits of the 
police-permitted and the logically impermissible. [Neue Zeit IX, 1, p.573.]``

Thus, Marx too spoke an entirely different language in puncto republic. Shortly 
before and after the Anti-Socialist law was in effect, Marx, like Engels, 
allowed – on the strength of assurances from Germany – that perhaps it wouldn’t 
do, to formally advance the demand for a republic in the program. But that 
today, a quarter century later, this demand in the agitation (and that is all 
we are concerned with here) should pass for something “entirely new” and 
unheard of – that is surely something which neither of them could have dreamed.

To be sure, Comrade Kautsky points out that he has already propagandized for a 
republic in the Neue Zeit, in a manner “totally different” from that in which 
I, in my harmless way, do so now. He must know more about it than I: in this 
case my memory seems to fail me. But is more conclusive proof required than the 
most recent events, that in this matter the essential thing, the follow-up in 
practice, was not done? The increase of the Prussian civil list[C] offered once 
again the most splendid opportunity imaginable, and at the same time laid the 
undeniable duty on the party to sound the slogan of a republic loud and clear, 
and to look to its propaganda. The insolent challenge of this government bill, 
following the ignominious end of the suffrage bill, should have been 
unconditionally answered by unfolding the political function of the monarchy 
and its personal authority in Prusso-Germany; by emphasizing its connection 
with militarism, navalism, and the social-political stasis; by recalling the 
famous “discourses” and “remarks”’ on the “rabble of the people” and the 
“compote dish”; by recalling the “penitentiary bill”;[D] by revealing the 
monarchy as the visible expression of the entire imperial German reaction.

The pathetic unanimity of all bourgeois parties in their Byzantine handling of 
the bill drastically shows once again, that in today’s Germany the slogan of a 
republic has become the shibboleth of class division, the watchword of class 
struggle. Of all this, nothing in the Neue Zeit or in Vorwärts. The increase of 
the civil list is not approached from the political side: it is treated chiefly 
as a fiscal question, as a question of the Hohenzollern family income, and this 
is dilated upon with more or less wit. But not one syllable in our two leading 
organs has championed the slogan of a republic.

Comrade Kautsky is a more qualified Marxian scholar than I: he should know 
better, what pointed adjective Marx would have applied to this “dodge” and this 
sort of republicanism “within the limits of the police-permitted and logically 
impermissible.”

Thus Comrade Kautsky is in error when he says I “bewail myself” of being “badly 
handled” by the editors of the Neue Zeit. I find only that Comrade Kautsky has 
handled himself badly.




Part 2

And now to the mass strike. To explain his unexpected stand against the slogan 
of the mass strike in the latest Prussian voting rights campaign, Comrade 
Kautsky created a whole theory of two strategies: the “strategy of overthrow” 
and the “strategy of attrition.” Now Comrade Kautsky goes a step farther, and 
constructs ad hoc yet another whole new theory of the conditions for political 
mass strikes in Russia and in Germany.

He begins with general reflections on the deceptiveness of historical examples, 
and how plausibly one can, with insufficient caution, find appropriate 
justification in history for all strategies, methods, aims, institutions, and 
earthly things in general. These observations, of a harmless nature in their 
initial breadth and generality, soon show their less than harmless tendency and 
purpose in this formulation: that it is “especially dangerous to appeal to 
revolutionary examples.” These warnings, in spirit somewhat reminiscent of 
Comrade Frohme’s fatherly admonitions, are directed specifically against the 
Russian Revolution [of 1905]. Thereupon follows a theory intended to show and 
prove the total antithesis of Russia and Germany: Russia, where conditions for 
the mass strike exist and Germany, where they do not.

In Russia we have the weakest government in the world, in Germany the 
strongest; in Russia an unsuccessful war with a small Asian land, in Germany 
the “glory of almost a century of continuous victories over the strongest great 
powers in the world.” In Russia we have economic backwardness and a peasantry 
which, until 1905, believed in the Tsar like a god; in Germany we have the 
highest economic development, and with it the concentrated might of the cartels 
which suppresses the working masses through the most ruthless terrorism. In 
Russia we have the total absence of political freedom; in Germany we have 
political freedom which provides the workers various “safe” forms for their 
protest and struggle, and hence they “are totally preoccupied with 
organizations, meetings, the press, and elections of all sorts.” And the result 
of these contrasts is this: in Russia the strike was the only possible form of 
proletarian struggle, and therefore the strike was in itself a victory, even 
though it was planless and ineffectual – and further, because strikes were 
forbidden, every strike was in itself a political act. On the other hand, in 
Western Europe – here the German schema is extended to all of Western Europe – 
such “amorphous, primitive strikes” have long been outmoded: here one only 
strikes when a positive result can be expected.

The moral of all this is that the long revolutionary period of mass strikes, in 
which economic and political action, demonstration and fighting strikes 
continuously alternate and are transformed one into the other, is a specific 
product of Russian backwardness. In Western Europe, and especially in Germany, 
even a demonstration mass strike like he Russian ones would be extremely 
difficult, almost impossible, “not in spite, but because of the half-century 
old socialist movement.” As a means of struggle, the political mass strike 
could only employed here in a single, final battle “to the death” – and 
therefore only when the question, for the proletariat, was to conquer or die.

In passing only, I wish to point out that Comrade Kautsky’s depiction of the 
Russian situation is, in the most important points, an almost total reversal of 
the truth. For example, the Russian peasantry did not suddenly begin to rebel 
in 1905. From the so-called emancipation of the serfs in 1861, with a single 
pause between 1885 and 1895, peasant uprisings run like a red thread through 
the internal history of Russia: uprisings against the landowners as well as 
violent resistance to the organs of government. It is this which occasioned the 
Minister of Interior’s well-known circular letter of 1898 which placed the 
entire Russian peasantry under martial law. The new and exceptional in 1905 was 
simply that, for the first time, the peasant masses’ chronic rebellion took on 
political and revolutionary meaning as concomitant and totalization of the 
urban proletariat’s goal-conscious, revolutionary class action.

Even more turned around, if this is possible, is Comrade Kautsky’s conception 
of the question’s main point – the strike and mass strike actions of the 
Russian proletariat. The picture of chaotic, “amorphous, primitive strikes” by 
the Russian workers – who strike out of bewilderment, simply to strike, without 
goal or plan, without demands and “definite successes” – is a blooming fantasy. 
The Russian strikes of the revolutionary period effected a very respectable 
raise in wages, but above all they succeeded in almost universally shortening 
the working day to ten hours, and in many cases to nine. With the most 
tenacious struggle, they were able to uphold the eight-hour day for many weeks 
in St. Petersburg. They won the right to organize not only for the workers, but 
for the state’s postal and railroad employees as well: and until the 
counter-revolution gained the upper hand, they defended this right from all 
attacks. They broke the overlordship of the employers, and in many of the 
larger enterprises they created workers’ committees to regulate working 
conditions. They undertook the task of abolishing piecework, household work, 
night work, factory penalties, and of forcing strict observance of Sundays off.

These strikes, from which promising union organizations rapidly sprouted in 
almost all industries with vigorous life, and with solid leadership, 
treasuries, constitutions, and an imposing union press – these strikes, from 
which as bold a creation as the famous St. Petersburg Council of Workers’ 
Delegates was born for unified leadership of the entire movement in the giant 
empire – these Russian strikes and mass strikes were so far from being 
“amorphous and primitive” that in boldness, strength, class solidarity, 
tenacity, material gains, progressive aims and organizational results, they 
could safely be set alongside any “West European” union movement. Granted, 
since the revolution’s defeat most of the economic gains, together with the 
political ones, have little by little been lost. But this plainly does not 
alter the character which the strikes had as long as the revolution lasted.

Not “organized” and hence “planless,” these economic, partial, and local 
conflicts continuously, “spontaneously” grew into general political and 
revolutionary mass strikes – from which, in turn, further local actions 
sprouted up thanks to the revolutionary situation and the potential energy of 
the masses’ class solidarity. The course and immediate outcome of such a 
general political-revolutionary action was also not “organized” and elemental – 
as will always be the case in mass movements and stormy times. But if, like 
Comrade Kautsky, one wishes to measure the progressive character of strikes and 
“rational strike leadership” by their immediate successes, the great period of 
strikes in Russia achieved relatively greater economic and social-political 
successes in a few years of revolution than the German union movement has in 
the four decades of its existence. And all this is due to neither a special 
heroism, nor a special genius of the Russian proletariat: it is simply the 
measure of a revolutionary period’s quickstep, against the leisurely gait of 
peaceful development within the framework of bourgeois parliamentarianism.

As Comrade Kautsky said in his Social Revolution, 2nd edition, p.63:

``There remains only one objection which can be, and hence all the more 
frequently will be raised to this “revolutionary romanticism”: that the 
situation in Russia proves nothing for us in Western Europe because our 
circumstances are fundamentally different.

Naturally, I am not unaware of the differences in circumstances: but they 
should not, on the other hand, be exaggerated. Our Comrade Luxemburg’s latest 
pamphlet clearly demonstrates that the Russian working class has not fallen as 
low and achieved as little as is generally accepted. Just as the English 
workers must break themselves of looking down on the German proletariat as a 
backward class, so we in Germany must give up viewing the Russians in the same 
way.``

And further on:

``As a political factor, the English workers today stand even lower than the 
workers of the economically most backward and politically least free of 
European states: Russia. It is their living revolutionary Reason that gives the 
Russians their great practical strength; and it was their renunciation of 
revolution and self-limitation to immediate interests, their so-called 
“political realism,” that made the English a zero in real politics.``

But for the present, let us set aside the Russian situation and turn to Comrade 
Kautsky’s depiction of the Prusso-German situation. Strange to say, here too we 
learn of marvels. For example, it has been until now the prerogative of East 
Elbian Junkerdom to live by the ennobling conviction that Prussia possesses 
“the strongest contemporary government.” How Social Democracy, on the other 
hand, should in all seriousness come to acknowledge a government to be “the 
strongest” which “is nothing but a military despotism embellished with 
parliamentary forms, alloyed with a feudal admixture, obviously influenced by 
the bourgeoisie, shored up with a bureaucracy and watched over by the police” – 
I find that somewhat hard to grasp. That foolish picture of misery, the 
Bethmann-Hollweg “cabinet”: a government reactionary to the bone and therefore 
without a plan or political direction, with lackeys and bureaucrats instead of 
statesmen, with a whimsical zig-zag course; internally the football of a vulgar 
Junker clique and the insolent intrigues of a courtly rabble; in its foreign 
policy, the football of a personal authority accountable to none; only a few 
years ago the contemptible shoeshine boy of the “weakest government in the 
world,” Russian Tsarism; propped up by an army which to an enormous extent 
consists of Social Democrats, with the stupidest drill, the most infamous 
mistreatment of soldiers in the world – this is the “strongest contemporary 
government”! In any case, a unique contribution to the materialist conception 
of history, which until now has not deduced the “strength” of a government from 
its backwardness, hatred of culture, “slavish obedience,” and police spirit.

Besides, Comrade Kautsky has done yet more for this “strongest government”: he 
has even wooed her with the “glory of almost a century of continuous victories 
over the strongest great powers in the world.” In the veterans’ associations 
they have lived, until now, solely on the “glorious campaign” of 1870. To 
construe his “century” of Prussian glory, Comrade Kautsky has apparently added 
in the Battle of Jena – as well as the Hunn Campaign in China led by our Count 
Waldersee,[A] and Trotha’s victory over the Hottentot women and children in the 
Kalahari.[B]

But as it says in Comrade Kautsky’s beautiful article of December 1906, The 
State of the Reich, at the end of a long and detailed description:

``Comparing the Reich’s shining outward state at its beginning with the present 
situation, one must confess that never has a more splendid inheritance of might 
and prestige been more rashly squandered ..., never in its history has the 
German Reich’s position in the world been weaker, and never has a German 
government more thoughtlessly and wilfully played with fire than at the present 
time. [Neue Zeit, XXV, 1, p.427]``

Of course, at that time the main thing was to paint the shining electoral 
victory that awaited us in the 1907 elections[C] and the overwhelming 
catastrophes which, according to Comrade Kautsky, would inevitably follow it – 
with the same inevitability with which he now has them follow the next 
Reichstag election.

On the other hand, from his depiction of economic and political conditions in 
Germany and Western Europe, Comrade Kautsky constructs a strike policy which – 
measured against reality – is a downright astonishing fantasy. “The worker,” 
Comrade Kautsky assures us, “in Germany – and throughout Western Europe as a 
whole – takes up the strike as a means of struggle only when he has the 
prospect of attaining definite successes with it. If these successes fail to 
appear, the strike has failed its purpose. With this discovery, Comrade Kautsky 
has pronounced a harsh judgement on the practice of German and “West European” 
unions. For what do the strike statistics in Germany show us? Of the 19,766 
strikes and lockouts we have had, in all, from 1890 to 1908, an entire quarter 
(25.2 percent) were wholly unsuccessful; almost another quarter (22.5 percent) 
were only partly successful; and less than half (49.5 percent) were totally 
successful. [Correspondence Bulletin of the General Commission of German 
Unions, 1909, Nr.7, Statistical Supplement.]

These statistics just as crassly contradict the theory of Comrade Kautsky that 
because of the effective development of the workers’ organizations as well as 
the cartels, “the struggles between these organizations likewise grow ever more 
centralized and concentrated” and on this account “ever more infrequent.” In 
the decade 1890 through 1899, we had a total of 3,722 strikes and lockouts in 
Germany; in the nine years 1900 through 1908, the time of greatest growth for 
both cartels and unions, we had 15,994. So little are strikes growing “ever 
more infrequent” that they have rather grown four times as numerous in the last 
decade. And while in the previous decade 425,14.2 workers took part in strikes, 
in the last nine years 1,709,415 did: once again four times as many, and thus 
on the average approximately the same number per strike.

According to the schema of Comrade Kautsky, one quarter to one half of all 
these union struggles in Germany have “failed their purpose.” But every union 
agitator knows very well that “definite successes” in the form of material 
gains absolutely are not and cannot be the sole purpose, the sole determining 
aspect in economic struggles. Instead, union organizations “in Western Europe” 
are forced step by step into a position which compels them to take up the 
struggle with limited prospects of “definite successes”: as specifically shown 
by the statistics of purely defensive strikes, of which a whole 32.5 percent 
turned out completely unsuccessful. That such “unsuccessful” strikes have, 
nevertheless, not “failed their purpose”; that on the contrary they are a 
direct condition of life for the defense of the workers’ standard of living, 
for sustaining the workers’ fighting spirit, for impeding future onslaughts by 
the employers: these are the elementary ground rules of German union practice.

And further, it is generally known that besides a “definite success” in 
material gains, and indeed without this success, strikes “in Western Europe” 
have perhaps their most important effect as beginning points of union 
organization: and it is specifically in backward places and hard-to-organize 
branches of labor that such “unsuccessful” and “ill-advised” strikes are most 
common, from which over and over arise the foundations of union organization. 
The history of the Vogtland textile workers’ struggles and sufferings, whose 
most famous chapter is the great Crimmitschau strike,[D] is but a single 
testimony to this. The “strategy” which Comrade Kautsky has now set forth is 
not merely incapable of directing a great political mass action, but even a 
normal union movement.

But the above-mentioned schema for “West European” strikes has yet another 
gaping hole – just at the point, in fact, where the economic struggle brings 
the question of the mass strike and thus our own proper theme, into 
consideration. That is, this schema entirely excludes the fact that it is just 
“in Western Europe” where ever longer more violent strikes without much “plan” 
break like an elemental storm over those regions where a great exploited mass 
of proletarians stands opposed to the concentrated ruling power of capital or 
the capitalistic state: strikes which grow not “ever more infrequent” but ever 
more frequent; which mostly end without any “definite successes” at all – but 
in spite, or rather just because of this are of greater significance as 
explosions of a deep inner contradiction which spills over into the realm of 
politics. These are the periodic giant strikes of the miners in Germany, in 
England, in France, in America; these are the spontaneous mass strikes of the 
farm workers, as they have occurred in Italy and in Galicia; and further, the 
mass strikes of the railroad workers which break out now in this state, now in 
that one.

As it says in Comrade Kautsky’s excellent article on The Lessons of the Miners’ 
Strike of 1905 in the Ruhr district:

``In this way alone can substantial advances be realized for the miners. The 
strike against the mine owners has become hopeless: from now on the strike must 
step forward as political; its demands, its tactics must be calculated to set 
legislation in motion ...``

And Comrade Kautsky continues:

``This new union tactic of the political strike, of uniting union and political 
action, is in fact the only one which remains possible for the miners; and it 
is the only one certain to reanimate union as well as parliamentary action, and 
to give heightened aggressive strength to both.``

It could appear, perhaps, that here under “political action” we are to 
understand parliamentary action and not political mass strikes. Comrade Kautsky 
destroys every doubt, declaring point-blank:

``But the great decisive actions of the struggling proletariat will be fought 
out more and more through various sorts of political strikes. And here practice 
strides forward faster than theory. For while we discuss the political strike 
and search for its theoretical formulation and confirmation, one mighty 
political mass strike after another flames up through the spontaneous 
combustion of the masses – or rather every mass strike becomes a political 
action, every great political test of strength climaxes in a mass strike, 
whether among the miners, the proletariat of Russia, the Italian farm workers 
and rail road workers, etc. [Neue Zeit, XXIII, 1, pp.780, 781 – R.L.]``

So wrote Comrade Kautsky on March 11, 1905.

Here we have “the spontaneous combustion of the masses” and the union 
leadership, economic struggle and political struggle, mass strikes and 
revolution, Russia and Western Europe in the most beautiful confusion, all 
rubrics of the schema fused together in the living interconnection of a great 
period of fierce social storms.

It seems that “theory” does not merely “stride forward” more slowly than 
practice: alas, from time to time it also goes tumbling backwards.



Part 3

We have briefly examined the factual basis of Comrade Kautsky’s newest theory 
on Russia and Western Europe. But the most important thing about this latest 
creation is its general tendency, which runs on to construct an absolute 
contradiction between revolutionary Russia and parliamentary “Western Europe,” 
and sets down the prominent role played by the political mass strike in the 
Russian Revolution as a product of Russia’s economic and political backwardness.

But here Comrade Kautsky finds himself in the disagreeable position of having 
proved much too much. In this case, somewhat less would have been decidedly 
more.

Above all, Comrade Kautsky has not noticed that his current theory destroys his 
earlier theory of the “strategy of attrition.” At the center of the “strategy 
of attrition” stands an allusion to the coming Reichstag elections. My 
inexcusable error lay in this: I held that the mass strike was already called 
for in the present struggle for Prussian voting rights, while Comrade Kautsky 
declared that our overwhelming victory-to-come in next year’s Reichstag 
elections would create the “entirely new situation” which might make the mass 
strike necessary and appropriate. But now Comrade Kautsky has demonstrated with 
all desirable clarity that conditions for a period of political mass strikes in 
Germany – indeed, in all of Western Europe – are lacking after all. “Because of 
the half-century old socialist movement, Social Democratic organization and 
political freedom,” even simple demonstration mass strikes of the extent and 
momentum of the Russian ones have become almost impossible in Western Europe.

Yet if this is so, then prospects for the mass strike after Reichstag elections 
seem fairly problematic. It is clear that all the conditions which make the 
mass strike absolutely impossible in Germany – the strongest contemporary 
government and its glittering prestige, the slavish obedience of the state 
employees, the unshakeable opposing might of the cartels, the political 
isolation of the proletariat – that all this will not suddenly disappear after 
next year. If the reasons which speak against the political mass strike no 
longer lie in the situation of the moment, as the “strategy of attrition” would 
have it, but in the direct results of “half a century of socialist 
enlightenment and political, freedom,” in the highly developed level of 
“Western Europe’s” economic and political life – then postponement of 
expectations for a mass strike until the year after the Reichstag elections 
turns out to be no more than a modest fig leaf covering the “strategy of 
attrition’s” only real content: the commendation of Reichstag elections. In my 
first reply I tried to show that in reality the “strategy of attrition” 
amounted to “Nothing-But-Parliamentarianism.” Now Comrade Kautsky himself 
confirms this in elaborating his theories.

Yet more. Comrade Kautsky has, to be sure postponed the great mass action until 
after the Reichstag elections: but at the same time he must admit that in the 
present situation, the political mass strike could become necessary “at any 
moment” – for “never in the history of the German Reich were the social, 
political, and international contradictions under such tension as now.”[K. 
Kautsky, What Now?, Neue Zeit XXVIII, 2 (15 April 1910), p.80.] But if in 
general the social conditions and historic ripeness of “Western Europe,” and 
specifically of Germany, make a mass strike action impossible now, how can such 
an action suddenly “at any moment” be set in motion? A brutal provocation by 
the police, a massacre at a demonstration could greatly heighten the masses’ 
agitation and sharpen the situation: yet it obviously could not be that “great 
occasion” which would abruptly overturn the entire economic and political 
structure of Germany.

But Comrade Kautsky has proved yet another superfluous thing. If the general 
economic and political conditions in Germany are such as to make a mass strike 
action like the Russian one impossible, and if the extension which the mass 
strike underwent in the Russian Revolution is the specific product of Russian 
backwardness, then not only is the use of the mass strike in the Prussian 
voting rights struggle called into question, but the Jena resolution as well. 
Until now, the resolution of the Jena party convention [of 1905] was regarded 
both here and abroad as such a highly significant announcement because it 
officially borrowed the mass strike from the arsenal of the Russian Revolution, 
and incorporated it among the tactics of German Social Democracy as a means of 
political struggle. Admittedly this resolution was formally so composed, and by 
many exclusively interpreted so that Social Democracy seemed to declare it 
would only turn to the mass strike in case of an attack on Reichstag voting 
rights. But once, in any case, Comrade Kautsky did not belong to those 
formalists; indeed, in 1904 he emphatically wrote:

``If we learn one thing from the Belgian example, it is that it would be a 
fatal error for us in Germany to commit ourselves to a specific time for 
proclaiming the political strike – for example, in the event of an attack on 
the present Reichstag voting rights. [Revolutionaries Everywhere, Neue Zeit 
XXII, 1, p.736. RL’s emphasis]``

The chief significance, the essential content of the Jena resolution lay not in 
this formalistic “commitment, “ but in the fact of German Social Democracy’s 
principled acceptance of the lessons and example of the Russian Revolution. It 
was the spirit of the Russian Revolution which ruled the convention of our 
party in Jena. And now when Comrade Kautsky directly derives the role of the 
mass strike in the Russian Revolution from Russian backwardness, thereby 
constructing a contradiction between revolutionary Russia and parliamentary 
“Western Europe”; when he emphatically warns against the examples and methods 
of revolution – yes when by implication even the proletariat’s defeat the 
Russian Revolution is debited in his account to the grandiose mass strike 
action, through which the proletariat “must eventually be exhausted” – in 
short, when Comrade Kautsky declares point-blank “but be that as it may, the 
schema of the Russian mass strike before and during the revolution does not fit 
German conditions”: then from this standpoint it seems an incredible blunder, 
that German Social Democracy officially borrowed the mass strike directly from 
the Russian Revolution as a new means of struggle. At bottom, Comrade Kautsky’s 
current theory is a frightfully fundamental revision of the Jena resolution.

To justify his individual, cockeyed stand in the last Prussian voting rights 
campaign, Comrade Kautsky step-by-step sells out the lessons of the Russian 
Revolution – the most significant extension and enrichment of proletarian 
tactics in the last decade.




Part 4

In light of the conclusions which follow from Comrade Kautsky’s newest theory, 
it now becomes clear -how very false, from the ground up, this theory is. To 
derive the mass strike action of the Russian proletariat, unparalleled in the 
history of modern class struggle, from Russia’s social backwardness – in other 
words, to explain the outstanding importance and leading role of the urban 
industrial proletariat in the Russian Revolution as Russian “backwardness” – is 
to stand things right on their heads.

It was not economic retardation, but precisely the high development of 
capitalism, modern industry, and commerce in Russia which made that grandiose 
mass strike action possible, and which caused it. It was just because the urban 
industrial proletariat was already so numerous, concentrated in the great 
centers, and so strongly moved by class consciousness, just because the genuine 
modern capitalist contradiction had progressed so far, that the struggle for 
political freedom could be decisively led by this proletariat alone. But 
because of this it could be no purely constitutional struggle after the liberal 
formula, but a genuine modern class struggle in all its breadth and depth, 
fighting for the economic as well as the political interests of the workers – 
against capital as well as Tsarism, for the eight-hour day as well as a 
democratic constitution. And only because capitalist industry and the modern 
means of commerce bound to it had become a condition of existence for the 
state’s economic life, could the mass strikes of the proletariat in Russia 
realize such a staggering, decisive effect: that the revolution celebrated its 
victories with them, and with them went down in defeat and grew silent.

At this moment I can think of no more exact formulation of the factors in 
question here, than that which I gave in my pamphlet on the mass strike in 1906:

``We have seen that the mass strike in Russia represents not the synthetic 
product of a deliberate Social Democratic tactic, but a natural historic figure 
on the ground of the present revolution. What are the forces in Russia now 
which have brought forth this new manifestation of revolution?

The immediate task of the Russian Revolution is putting an end to absolutism 
and establishing a modern bourgeois-parliamentary constitutional state. 
Formally, this is exactly the same task faced by the March Revolution in 
Germany and by the Great Revolution in France at the end of the eighteenth 
century. But the circumstances, the historic milieu in which these formally 
analogous revolutions took place, are fundamentally different from those of 
today’s Russia. The difference in circumstances is the entire cycle of 
capitalist development which has run between those bourgeois revolutions in the 
West and the present bourgeois revolution in the East. That is, this 
development has not seized the Western European lands alone, but absolutist 
Russia as well. Large scale industry with all its consequences – the modern 
class division, the glaring social contrasts, modern metropolitan life and the 
modern proletariat – has become the leading form of production in Russia (i.e., 
the decisive one for its social development).

But from this has resulted a strange, contradictory historical situation: that 
a revolution whose formal objectives are bourgeois will be carried out under 
the leadership of a modern, class-conscious proletariat, and in an 
international milieu which stands under the sign of bourgeois democracy’s 
downfall. Now the bourgeoisie is not the leading revolutionary element it was 
in the earlier revolutions of the West, when the proletarian mass, dissolved in 
the petty bourgeoisie, served as its military levies. All is reversed: the 
class-conscious proletariat is the leading, driving element; the big bourgeois 
strata are in part directly counter-revolutionary, in part weakly liberal; only 
the rural petty bourgeoisie, along with the urban petty bourgeois 
intelligentsia, are decidedly oppositional, indeed revolutionary minded. But 
the Russian proletariat, so clearly destined for the leading role in the 
bourgeois revolution, is itself free from all illusions about bourgeois 
democracy – and therefore it enters the struggle with a strongly developed 
consciousness of its own specific class interests in the acutely sharpened 
opposition of capital and labor.

This contradictory state of affairs is expressed in the fact that in this 
formally bourgeois revolution, bourgeois society’s opposition to absolutism 
will be commanded by the proletariat’s opposition to bourgeois society; that 
the proletariat’s struggle will be simultaneously directed, with equal force, 
against absolutism and capitalist exploitation; that the program of 
revolutionary struggle is directed, with equal emphasis, toward political 
freedom and the eight-hour day, as well as a material existence for the 
proletariat worthy of humanity. This two-fold character of the Russian 
Revolution manifests itself in that inner unity and reciprocal action of 
economic and political struggle in which we have been instructed by the events 
in Russia, and which finds its natural expression in the mass strike ...

So the mass strike shows itself to be no specifically Russian product, arising 
from absolutism, but a universal form of proletarian class struggle resulting 
from the present stage of capitalist development and class relations. From this 
standpoint, the three bourgeois revolutions – the Great French Revolution, the 
German March Revolution, and the present Russian one – form an on-running chain 
of development in which the prosperity and the end of the capitalist century 
are reflected ...

The present revolution realizes, in the special circumstances of absolutist 
Russia, the universal results of international capitalist development: and in 
this it seems less a final descendant of the old bourgeois revolutions than a 
forerunner of a new series of proletarian revolutions in the West. Just because 
it has so inexcusably delayed its bourgeois revolution, the most backward land 
shows ways and methods of extended class struggle for the proletariat of 
Germany and the most advanced capitalist lands.``

Earlier, Comrade Kautsky also viewed the Russian Revolution in the same 
historical perspective. In December 1906, in complete agreement with my 
interpretation, he wrote:

``We may most speedily master the lessons of the Russian Revolution and the 
tasks which it sets us, if we regard it as neither a bourgeois revolution in 
the traditional sense nor a socialist one, but as a wholly unique process 
taking place on the border line between bourgeois and socialist society’ it 
demands dissolution of the one, prepares for the formation of the other, and in 
either case brings all of humanity under capitalist civilization a mighty step 
forward in its march of development. [Driving Forces and Perspectives of the 
Russian Revolution, Neue Zeit, XXV. 1. p.333]``

If thus one grasps the real social and historical conditions which lie at the 
root of the Russian Revolution’s specific new form of struggle, the mass strike 
action – and another interpretation is not very well possible without 
phantasizing the actual course of this action out of thin air, as Comrade 
Kautsky now does with his “amorphous, primitive strikes” – then it is clear 
that mass strikes as the form of the proletariat’s revolutionary struggle come 
into consideration even more for Western Europe than in Russia, to the extent 
which capitalism (in Germany, for example) is much more highly developed.

In fact, all the conditions which Comrade Kautsky mobilizes against the 
political mass strike are just so many forces which must make the mass strike 
action in Germany even more inevitable, extensive, and powerful.

The opposing might of the cartels which Comrade Kautsky invokes, “searching” in 
vain “for its like,” the slavish obedience in which the enormous category of 
German state employees is sunken – these are the very things which make a 
peaceful, profitable union action ever more difficult for the bulk of the 
German proletariat. They feed ever mightier trials of strength and explosions 
in the economic sphere, whose elemental character and mass extension take on 
more and more political meaning the longer they continue.

It is just the political isolation of the proletariat in Germany to which 
Comrade Kautsky refers, just the fact that the united bourgeoisie down to the 
last petty bourgeois stands behind the government like a wall, that shapes 
every great political struggle against the government into a struggle against 
the bourgeoisie, against exploitation. And the same circumstances guarantee 
that every energetic revolutionary mass action in Germany will not take 
parliamentary forms of liberalism or the previous form of the revolutionary 
petty bourgeoisie’s struggle, the brief barricade battle, but the classic 
proletarian form of the mass strike.

And finally: it is just because we in Germany have “a half century of socialist 
enlightenment and political freedom” behind us, that as soon as the situation 
has so ripened that the masses take to the field, the action of the proletariat 
set in motion by every political struggle will roll together all ancient 
reckonings against private and state exploitation, and unite the political with 
an economic mass struggle. For, as Comrade Kautsky wrote in 1907:

``We have not the slightest ground to assume that the degree of exploitation of 
the German proletariat is less than that in Russia. On the contrary, we have 
seen that with the advance of capitalism the exploitation of the proletariat 
increases. If the German worker is in a somewhat better position than the 
Russian, the productivity of his labor is also much greater, and the needs in 
relation to the general national standard of living are much higher: so that 
the German worker finds the capitalist yoke perhaps even more galling than the 
Russian does. [The Social Revolution, 2nd ed., p.60.]``

Comrade Kautsky, who paints in such splendid colors how the German worker is 
“totally preoccupied with organizations, meetings, and elections of all sorts,” 
has for the moment forgotten the quite enormous slave herds of Prusso-German 
state employees, railroad workers and postal workers, as well as the farm 
workers, who unfortunately enjoy very limited measure of that contented 
preoccupation with “organizations, meetings, and options of all sorts” as long 
as the right to organize is legally or practically denied them. He has 
forgotten that in the midst of royal Prussian freedom these enormous categories 
live politically as well as economically in genuine “Russian” conditions, and 
that therefore these very categories – not to mention the miners – will find it 
impossible, in the midst of a political convulsion, to maintain their slavish 
obedience or to refrain from presenting their special bill of reckoning in the 
form of giant mass strikes.

But let us look at “Western Europe.” In disputing all this, Comrade Kautsky has 
yet another opponent besides myself to deal with: reality. Specifically, what 
do we see here when we only direct our attention to the most important mass 
strikes of the last ten years?

The great Belgian mass strikes which won universal suffrage stand by themselves 
in the ’90s as a bold experiment. Nevertheless, what depth and 
multidimensionality!

In 1900 the mass strike by the miners in Pennsylvania which, according to the 
testimony of American comrades, did more to spread socialist ideas than ten 
years of agitation; also in 1900, mass strike by the miners in Austria; 1902, 
mass strike by the miners in France; 1902, general strike by all production 
workers in Barcelona in support of the struggling metal workers; 1902, 
demonstration mass strike in Sweden for universal, equal suffrage; 1902, mass 
strike in Belgium for universal, equal suffrage; 1902, mass strike by the farm 
workers in all east Galicia (over 200,000 taking part) in defense of the right 
to organize; 1903, in January and April, two mass strikes by the railroad 
workers in Holland; 1904, mass strike by the railroad workers in Hungary; 1904, 
demonstration mass strike in Italy protesting the massacres in Sardinia; in 
January 1905, mass strike by the miners in the Ruhr district; in October 1905, 
demonstration mass strike in and around Prague (by 100,000 workers) for 
universal, equal suffrage in Bohemian Landtag elections; in October 190 
demonstration mass strike in Lemburg for universal equal suffrage in Galician 
Landtag elections; in November 1905, demonstration mass strike in all of 
Austria for universal, equal suffrage in Reichsrat elections; 1905, mass strike 
by the Italian farm workers; 1905, mass strike by the Italian railroad workers; 
1906, demonstration mass strike in Trieste for universal, equal suffrage in 
Landtag elections which victoriously forced the reform through; 1906, mass 
strike by the foundry workers in Witkowiz (Moravia) in support of 400 shop 
stewards fired because of the May Day celebration – victoriously concluded; 
1909, mass strike in Sweden in defense of the right to organize; 1909, mass 
strike by the postal workers in France; in October 1909, demonstration mass 
strike by all workers in Trient and Rovereto protesting the political 
persecution of Social Democracy; 1910, mass strike in Philadelphia in support 
of the streetcar workers’ struggle for the right to organize; and at this 
moment, preparations for a mass strike by the railroad workers in France.

This is the “impossibility” of “West European” mass strikes, especially 
demonstration mass strikes, which Comrade Kautsky has so beautifully 
demonstrated in black and white. Comrade Kautsky has theoretically proved the 
obvious impossibility of mixing political and economic strikes, the 
impossibility of impressive, general demonstration mass strike, the 
impossibility of mass strikes being a period of repeated hand-to-hand combat. 
He has forgotten that for the last ten years we have lived in a period of 
economic, political, fighting and demonstration strikes: a period which has 
extended, with striking unity, over almost all “West European lands” as well as 
the United States; over the capitalistically most backward like Spain, and the 
most advanced like North America; over lands with the weakest union movements 
like France, and those with strapping Social Democratic unions like Austria; 
over agrarian Galicia and highly industrialized Bohemia; over half-feudal 
states like the Hapsburg monarchy, republics like France, and absolutist states 
like Russia. And of course, in addition to the above-enumerated stands Russia’s 
grandiose mass strike action from 1902 to 1906, which has shown how the 
significance and extent of the mass strike initially grow together with the 
revolutionary situation and the political action of the proletariat.

``For while we discuss the political strike and search for its theoretical 
formulation and confirmation, one mighty political mass strike after another 
flames up through the spontaneous combustion of the masses – or rather every 
mass strike becomes a political action, every great political test of strength 
climaxes in a mass strike, whether among the miners, the proletariat of Russia, 
the Italian farm workers and rail-road workers, etc. [K. Kautsky, “The Lessons 
of the Miners’ Strikes,” Neue Zeit XXIII, [1], p.781.]``

From this it almost seems as if Comrade Kautsky, through his newest theory of 
the impossibility of a period of political mass strikes in Germany, has 
demonstrated not so much a contradiction between Russia and Western Europe as a 
contradiction between Germany and the rest of the world – Western Europe and 
Russia thrown in together. Prussia must in fact be the exception among all 
capitalist lands, if what Comrade Kautsky has worked out on the impossibility 
of even short general demonstration mass strikes in Prussia is true. It would 
be “entirely unthinkable that in a demonstration strike against the government 
here, commuter railways, streetcars, and gas works come to a standstill,” that 
we in Germany experience a demonstration strike which “alters the entire 
landscape, and in so doing makes the deepest impression on the entire bourgeois 
world as well as the most indifferent strata of the proletariat.” But then what 
is “unthinkable” in Germany must be what has already proved itself possible in 
Galicia, in Bohemia, in Italy, in Trieste and Trento, in Spain, and in Sweden. 
In all these lands and cities, splendid demonstration strikes have taken place 
which completely altered “the landscape.” In Bohemia on November 20, 1905, an 
absolute, general work stoppage reigned which extended even to agriculture – a 
thing they have not yet experienced in Russia. In Italy in September 1904 the 
farm workers, streetcars, electric and gas works took a holiday, and even the 
daily press had to stop publication. “It has indeed become the most total 
general strike,” wrote the Neue Zeit, “that history knows of: for three whole 
days the city of Genoa was left without light and bread and meat; all economic 
life was paralysed.” [Oda Olberg, The Italian General Strike, Neue Zeit XXIII, 
1, p.19.] In Sweden’s capital Stockholm, in 1902 as well as 1909, all means of 
communication and commerce – streetcars, cabs, wagons, municipal services – 
were shut down in the first week. In Barcelona in 1902, all economic life 
rested for many days.

And so in Prusso-Germany – with its “strongest contemporary government,” and 
its special “German conditions” which supposedly show proletarian methods of 
struggle, possible in all the rest of the world, to be all sorts of 
impossibilities – we have finally acquired an unexpected counterpart to those 
special “Bavarian” and “south German” conditions which Comrade Kautsky once so 
heartily derided with us. But in particular, these German “impossibilities” 
plume themselves on the fact that precisely in Germany we have the strongest 
party, the strongest unions, the best organization, the greatest discipline, 
the most enlightened proletariat, and the greatest influence of Marxism. By 
this method we would come, in fact, to the singular conclusion that the 
stronger Social Democracy is, the more powerless the proletariat. But I believe 
that to say mass strikes and demonstration strikes which were possible in 
various other lands are impossible today in Germany, is to fix a brand of 
incapacity on the German proletariat which it has as yet done nothing to 
deserve.



Part 5

What actually remains of Comrade Kautsky’s mass strike theory, after he has 
pointed out all the “impossibilities”? The one, “final,” pure political mass 
strike, disengaged from economic strikes: which once only, but with absolute 
conclusiveness, smashes down like thunder out of the clear blue sky. Says 
Comrade Kautsky:

``Here, in this conception, lies the deepest ground of the differences between 
my friends and me over the mass strike. They anticipate a period of mass 
strikes. Under the existing conditions in Germany, I can imagine a political 
mass strike only as a one-time event into which the entire proletariat of the 
Reich enters with its entire strength; as a struggle to the death; as a 
struggle which either overthrows our enemies, or smashes – or at least cripples 
– the totality of our organizations and our entire strength for years on end.``

As for this image of the “final mass strike” which swims before Comrade 
Kautsky, one must first of all say that it is, at any rate, a totally, new 
creation: for it is not drawn from reality, but out of pure “imagination.” For 
not only does it fit no Russian pattern: not one mass strike of the many which 
have taken place in “Western Europe” or the United States approximately 
resembles the exemplar which Comrade Kautsky has invented for Germany. None of 
the mass strikes known till now was a “final” struggle “to the death”; none led 
to the total victory of the workers, but none “smashed the totality of 
organizations and the entire strength” of the proletariat “for years on end.” 
Success was mostly a partial and an indirect one. The miners’ giant strikes 
usually ended in a direct defeat: but as a further consequence, they realized 
important social reforms through their pressure – in Austria the nine-hour day, 
in France the eight-hour day. The most important consequence of the Belgian 
mass strike in 1893 was the conquest of universal, unequal suffrage. Last 
year’s Swedish mass strike, formally concluded with a compromise, actually 
warded off a general attack by the confederated business world on the Swedish 
unions. In Austria, demonstration strikes have mightily hastened electoral 
reform. The mass strikes of the farm workers, with their formal partial 
ineffectiveness, have greatly strengthened the organization among the farm 
workers of Italy and Galicia. All mass strikes, whether economic or political, 
demonstration or fighting strikes, have contained what Comrade Oda Olberg so 
compellingly described in her report of the Italian railroad workers’ strike in 
the Neue Zeit:

``The achievements of the political mass strike are incalculable: its worth 
continuously grows with the degree of proletarian class consciousness. A 
political strike carried out with energy and solidarity is never lost, because 
it is what it aims at – a developing exercise of the proletariat’s power in 
which the fighters steel their strength and sense of responsibility, and) the 
ruling classes become conscious of their adversary’s might. [Neue Zeit XXIII, 
2, p.385.]``

But if until now every mass strike without exception, “West European” as well 
as Russian, in direct contradiction to Comrade Kautsky’s newest schema has 
brought on neither the total victory nor the destruction of the proletariat, 
but on the contrary an almost invariable strengthening of the workers’ 
organizations, class consciousness, and self-confidence, then on the other side 
the question arises: how can that great and “final,” that apocalyptic mass 
strike in which the stoutest oaks crack, the earth bursts asunder and the 
graves open actually come to pass in Germany, if the mass of the proletariat 
has not previously been prepared, schooled, and aroused by an entire lengthy 
period of mass strikes, of economic or political mass struggles?

According to Comrade Kautsky, “the entire proletariat of the Reich” will plunge 
into this “final” mass strike, and what is more “with its entire strength.” But 
how are the Prusso-German state employees, the railroad workers, postal 
workers, etc., who today are paralysed in “slavish obedience,” the farm workers 
who have no right to organize and no organization, the broad strata of workers 
still stuck in enemy organizations, in Christian, Hirsch-Dunckerist,[A] yellow 
unions – in short, the great mass of the German proletariat whom we have not 
yet reached with our union organization or Social Democratic agitation – how 
are they suddenly, with one leap, to be ready for a “final” mass strike “to the 
death” unless a preceding period of tempestuous mass struggles, demonstration 
strikes, partial mass strikes, giant economic struggles, etc., loosens them 
little by little from their paralysis, their slavish obedience, their 
fragmentation, and incorporates them among the followers of Social Democracy?

Even Comrade Kautsky had to see this. “Naturally,” he says, “I do not imagine 
this one-time event as an isolated act ’shot from a pistol.’ I too expect an 
era of embittered mass struggles and mass actions, but with the mass strike as 
the final weapon.” But what “mass struggles and mass actions” does Comrade 
Kautsky have in mind which will lead to that “final” mass strike, which do not 
themselves consist of the mass strike? Could it be street demonstrations? But 
one cannot simply hold street demonstrations for decades on end. And Comrade 
Kautsky certainly rules out general, impressive demonstration strikes for 
Germany: indeed, it is “entirely unthinkable that in a demonstration strike 
against the government here, commuter railways, streetcars, and gas works come 
to a standstill.” Likewise, economic mass strikes could not accomplish that 
preparation for the political mass strike: according to Comrade Kautsky they 
are to be kept at a strict distance from the political mass strike, to him they 
are not at all beneficial but even – almost harmful. Of what, finally, shall 
those “embittered” mass struggles and mass actions of the preparatory era 
consist? Perhaps of “embittered” Reichstag elections, or meetings with protest 
resolutions? But those enormous strata of the unorganized or oppositionally 
organized proletariat, upon whom the “final” mass strike depends, unfortunately 
stay away from our meetings. And so it is utterly impossible to conceive how we 
will actually win, arouse, and school the “entire proletariat of the Reich” for 
the final struggle “to the death.”

Whether Comrade Kautsky wishes it or not, his final mass strike, just in ruling 
out a period of the mass strike’s economic and political character, comes at us 
simply shot from a pistol.

But finally, one must ask: what kind of a “final” mass strike is this, that 
comes only once and in which the entire proletariat of the Reich will grapple 
to the death? Should we understand by this a periodic “final” mass strike which 
in every great political campaign – for example, for Prussian voting rights, to 
prevent the outbreak of war, etc. – will finally give the decision? But one 
cannot periodically struggle “to the death” again and again. Painted thus, a 
mass strike in which the “entire proletariat” grapples “with its entire 
strength” “to the death” can only be the struggle for total political power in 
the state: obviously the “final” struggle “to the death” can only be that in 
which the proletariat wrestles for its dictatorship and to finish off the 
bourgeois class-state. In this way, the political mass strike for Germany 
withdraws farther and farther. First, through the “strategy of attrition” it 
was expected the year after the Reichstag elections: now it vanishes from sight 
as the “final, “ the solitary mass strike and teases us, from beyond the blue 
horizon, with – the social revolution.

Let us now recall the stipulations which Comrade Kautsky, in his first article 
“What Now?” attaches to accomplishment of the political mass strike – strictest 
secrecy of preparations, decision-making by the supreme “war council” of the 
party, the greatest possible surprise of the enemy – and we unexpectedly 
receive a mental image which bears a strong resemblance to the “final Great 
Day” of the general strike after the anarchist formula. The idea of the mass 
strike is transformed from a historical process of the modern proletarian class 
struggles in their decades-long period of conclusion, into a free-for-all in 
which the “entire proletariat of the Reich,” with one jolt, suddenly brings 
down the bourgeois social order.

But what did Comrade Kautsky write in 1907 in his Social Revolution, 2nd 
edition, p.54?

``That is nonsensical. A general strike in which all workers in a country cease 
their labors at a given signal presupposes a unaminity and organization of the 
workers which can hardly be reached in the present society – and if it were 
reached, would be so irresistible as to dispense with the general strike. But 
such a strike, with one jolt, would suddenly render not merely the existing 
society, but every existence impossible – that of the proletarians even sooner 
than that of the capitalists. It would thus infallibly break at the very moment 
it began to unfold its revolutionary effect.

As a means of political struggle, the strike could hardly (certainly not in the 
foreseeable future) assume the form of a strike by all workers in a country ... 
We face a period when the isolated, non-political strike will be as hopeless 
against the superior strength of the cartels as the isolated parliamentary 
action of the workers’ parties is against the force of the 
capitalist-controlled state power. It will become ever more urgent for each to 
supplement the other and draw new strength from their joint action.

Like the use of every new weapon, that of the political strike must first be 
learned.``

And so the more Comrade Kautsky turned to broad theoretical generalizations to 
justify his position in the Prussian voting rights struggle, the more he lost 
sight of the general perspective of the development of the class struggle in 
Western Europe and in Germany – which in previous years he never tired of 
pointing out. Indeed, he himself had an uncomfortable sense of his present 
viewpoint’s incongruence with his earlier one, and was therefore good enough to 
completely reproduce his 1904 article series “Revolutionaries Everywhere” in 
the final, third part of his reply to me. The crass contradiction is not 
thereby done away with: it has only resulted in the chaotic, flickering 
character of that article’s last part, which so remarkably lessens one’s 
pleasure in reading it.

But not that article series alone is in shrill dissonance with what Comrade 
Kautsky now advances. In his Social Revolution, we read that we will enter a 
whole lengthy period of revolutionary struggles in which the political mass 
strike will “surely play a great role” (p.54). The entire pamphlet The Road to 
Power is devoted to the depiction of the same perspective. Yes, here we have 
already entered into the revolutionary period. Here Comrade Kautsky reviews the 
“political testament” of Friedrich Engels and declares the time of the 
“strategy of attrition,” which consists of legal exploitation of the given 
state groundwork, to be already past:

``At the beginning of the ’90s, I acknowledged that a peaceful development of 
proletarian organizations and the proletarian class struggle on the given state 
groundwork would bring the proletariat farthest forward in the situation of 
that time. And so you cannot reproach me with a craving for the intoxication of 
rrrevolution and rrradicalism when my observation of the present situation 
leads me to the view that conditions have fundamentally changed since the 
beginning of the ’90s, that we have every reason to assume we have entered into 
a period of struggles for the state institutions and state power: struggles 
which under manifold changes of fortune could be drawn out for decades, whose 
forms and duration are unforeseeable at present, but which will most probably 
bring about a considerable increase in the proletariat’s power in the 
foreseeable future, if not indeed its total power in Western Europe.``

And farther on:

``But in this universal instability, the immediate tasks of the proletariat are 
clearly given. We have already developed them. There will be no further 
progress without altering the state groundwork on which we wage the struggle. 
To most energetically strive for democracy in the Reich, but also in the 
individual states – specifically in Prussia and Saxony – that is its first task 
in Germany; its first international task is the struggle against geopolitics 
and militarism.

As clearly visible as these problems are the means at our command for their 
solution. To those previously employed is now added the mass strike, which we 
had already theoretically accepted at the beginning of the ’90s, and whose 
applicability under favorable circumstances has since then been repeatedly 
demonstrated. [The Road to Power, pp.53, 101. My emphasis. R.L.]``

In his Social Revolution, in The Road to Power, in the Neue Zeit Comrade 
Kautsky preached the “political strike” to the German unions as the “new 
tactic” which would be compelled more and more as the cartels condemned the 
pure union strike to more and more ineffectiveness. Indeed it was this concept 
which led him, in bygone years, to an embittered feud with the Correspondence 
Bulletin of the General Commission of Unions.

Now Comrade Kautsky would strictly sever economic strikes from political 
action. Now he declares that all strikes in Western Europe must unconditionally 
achieve “definite successes” or they have “failed their purpose”; and as the 
means of “organizing the proletariat, heightening its insight and sense of 
strength, and increasing the masses’ confidence in their organizations,” he 
counts only “successfully fought campaigns for higher wages.” After all, we 
need nothing so urgently now as “visible successes” to impress the masses. “But 
there are few successes which so visibly document our mounting strength to the 
masses as electoral victories, as the conquest of new mandates.” Thus, 
Reichstag elections and mandates – that is Moses and the prophets!

Now we hear that the German worker is only ready for “safe” demonstrations, 
that “a mere demonstration strike is not even the most impressive” form of 
political protest, that “a victorious Reichstag election makes a far greater 
impact”! And finally “a real mass demonstration” worth anything at all, “which 
is not required for immediate defense, but which simply protests an injustice 
already existing for over half a century”: such a demonstration strike “without 
a powerful motive” would hardly be possible in Germany. Comrade Kautsky has 
simply not noticed that with his argumentation he has, in passing, leaked out 
the finest theoretical ground for – the abolition of May Day.

Comrade Kautsky quite rightly reminds us that “even before the Russian 
Revolution” he gave an exact description of the working of a political mass 
strike in his article “Revolutionaries Everywhere.” But it seems to me that 
what matters is not merely to sketch revolutionary struggles and their external 
course in theoretical abstraction – that is, in Never-Never Land – and to 
project their general schema: it is equally a matter of giving, at the same 
time, those slogans in practice which will release the maximum of the 
proletariat’s revolutionary energy and drive the situation forward the farthest 
and fastest.

Granted, in his numerous articles and his pamphlets Comrade Kautsky has given 
us, with compelling clarity, a picture of the revolutionary struggles of the 
future. For example, in his 1904 description of the mass strike he already 
showed how “every mansion, every granary, every factory, every telegraph 
office, every stretch of railroad is militarily guarded”; how the soldiers are 
loosed upon the masses everywhere, and how in spite of this it never comes to a 
battle “for wherever they come the masses scatter, to reassemble wherever the 
soldiers have not yet arrived or have just left”; how first “gas and electric 
works shut down, streetcars stop running, finally even the mails and railroads 
seized by the strike fever; first the state workers strike, then the junior 
civil servants as well” in short, all is here with a three-dimensionality, 
life, and realism that are all the more remarkable, in that he deals with 
events coming at us out of the blue sky. But when from these aetherial heights, 
where theory calmly circles like an eagle, the question first plunged to the 
flat land of the Prussian voting rights campaign, then suddenly the brainless 
and planless Prussian government was transfigured into a rocher de bronze [rock 
of bronze – Tr.]; the German conditions depicted in The Road to Power as ready 
for social revolution (Hurrah! March on! March on!) turned into a frozen land 
where “it is absolutely unthinkable” that workers in state workshops and civil 
servants, be they junior or senior, take part in a demonstration; and the 
“revolutionary era which is arising” transformed itself into an industrious 
preparation for Reichstag elections, for “there are few successes which so 
visibly document our strength to the masses” as – Reichstag mandates.

Heaven-storming theory – and “attrition” in practice; most revolutionary 
perspectives in the clouds – and Reichstag mandates as sole perspective in 
reality. Comrade Kautsky declared his campaign against me with the urgent 
necessity of rescuing the idea of the mass strike from compromise. I fear it 
would have been better for the idea of the mass strike as well as Comrade 
Kautsky, if this rescue had been forborne.



Part 6

Let us return to Prussia.

At the beginning of March, in view of the voting rights campaign which had 
begun and the mounting demonstration movement, I declared that if the party 
wished to lead the movement farther forward it must make the slogan of the mass 
strike the order of the day, and that a demonstration mass strike would be the 
first step toward this in the present situation. I considered that the party 
faced a dilemmas it would either raise the voting rights movement to sharper 
forms or, as in 1908, the movement would go back to sleep after a short time. 
Indeed, this was what summoned Comrade Kautsky to the field of battle against 
me.

And what do we see? Comrade Kautsky points out that, me to the contrary, we 
have certainly not experienced a hint of a mass strike; he triumphs that the 
situation has struck my initiative “dead as a doornail.” Now it seems that in 
his polemic zeal, Comrade Kautsky has completely overlooked something else that 
has unfortunately been struck “dead as a doornail”: namely the demonstrations, 
and with them the voting rights movement itself.

Comrade Kautsky argues against me that an intensification of the demonstrations 
is entirely unnecessary, that the party faces no dilemma, that the main thing 
is “to bring about the wider employment of street demonstrations – not to 
slacken in this, but on the contrary to make them ever mightier.” [What Now?, 
Neue Zeit, 15 April 1910, p.71.] Well, since April the street demonstrations 
have totally ceased. And not, indeed, through some lack of enthusiasm and 
fighting spirit among the masses: their inner creativity has not gone to sleep. 
No, the street demonstrations were simply called off by the leading party 
authorities in the face of the struggles and endeavors of the provinces, as the 
1st of May has shown, as the May demonstrations in Breslau and Braunschweig 
have further shown – deliberately called off. Just as I wrote in my first reply 
in the Neue Zeit, even at the end of March – without awaiting the further 
course of events and of the situation – under pressure of the mood of the 
provinces, they arranged the April 10 demonstration with the feeling: An end to 
this at last! And an end has been made. No demonstrations, not even meetings 
take up the voting rights question, the storm-breathing rubric of the voting 
rights struggle has disappeared from the party press. And this circumstance can 
serve as surest symptom that the thing, for the time being, is over and no 
longer actual: that our leading central organ Vorwärts began to concern itself 
with tactics in the voting rights struggle. “The popular movement in the grand 
style” is meanwhile sent back home.

What does Comrade Kautsky say to this? Does he who brought “Jest, Satire, Irony 
and Deeper Meaning” [the title of a comedy by Christian Dietrich Grabbe.] to 
bear on me venture the slightest word of reproach to the “higher authorities” 
who, despite his warning “not to slacken in the street demonstrations,” have 
plainly killed the demonstration movement? On the contrary: here Comrade 
Kautsky is all admiration, he can find only words of wonder for “the latest 
demonstration campaign” which “was the model of a successful strategy of 
attrition.” Quite right. This is just how it looks in practice, this “strategy 
of attrition” which, “worn down” by two bold steps forward, rests on its 
laurels and lets the crashing overture of the “popular movement in the grand 
style” run down into the gentle purring of preparations for Reichstag 
elections.[a]

So the voting rights movement is again brought to a standstill for one, perhaps 
two years: and what is more, at such a well-chosen moment that we have rendered 
the government the greatest service anyone could have possibly done it.

The withdrawal of the suffrage bill by Bethmann-Hollweg was the decisive 
moment. The government was in a tight corner. The parliamentary patchwork of 
electoral reform and the parliamentary horse-trading were bankrupt. The enemy 
was at the end of his rope. If we really were serious about practicing the 
“voting rights storm,” about the slogan “no peace in Prussia,” about the great 
words of the Prussian party convention, then the collapse of the government 
bill was the given moment to immediately launch a general, grandiose attack out 
of this fiasco of parliamentary action with the cry “Give us a new bill!”, with 
street demonstrations across the whole country which would then have led to a 
demonstration mass strike and mightily driven the struggle forward. Comrade 
Kautsky, who has most graciously proposed to acknowledge such brain storms as 
“armed” assembly in Treptower Park[B] as the application of my “strategy,” has 
here a clear example of what “my strategy” really calls for. Not childish Don 
Quixoteries like those Comrade Kautsky demands of me, but political 
exploitation of the enemy’s defeat as the only victory – which, moreover, is 
not so much the discovery of some “new strategy,” but rather the ABC of every 
revolutionary, yes, of every serious battle tactic.

That was the party’s task. And I am not here pronouncing the party’s 
unqualified duty to open a “revolutionary period” every Monday and Thursday. 
But I feel that if the party begins an action, if it has summoned up the storm 
and called its men-at-arms, the people, to the field of battle, if it has 
spoken of a “popular movement in the grand style” and attack “by all forces” – 
then it dare not, after two advances, suddenly scratch its head, gape about, 
and declare: “Never mind ... we didn’t mean it seriously this time ... let’s go 
home.” In my opinion such storm-mongering on approval and at word of command is 
unworthy of the party’s greatness and the seriousness of the situation, and 
inclined to discredit the party in the eyes of the masses. Further, the voting 
rights and demonstration movement which had begun was an excellent opportunity 
for arousing and enlightening the indifferent masses, and for winning 
unsympathetically-minded circles of workers as our regular agitation is not in 
the least in a position to do. By deliberately stopping the movement short, the 
party has left this splendid opportunity unexploited after the most beautiful 
beginning.

But further, and above all, political points of view come into question. It is 
most short-sighted to mechanically divide the question of Prussian electoral 
reform from the question of Reichstag voting rights and to declare that our big 
guns won’t go into action over the Prussian voting rights struggle, that we’ll 
save them in case Reichstag voting rights are annulled after the Reichstag 
elections. Plainly, one must deliberately close one’s eyes to the actual 
interconnections not to see that in the present situation, struggle for 
Prussian electoral reform is essentially nothing other than struggle for 
Reichstag voting rights. It is clear that an energetic and victorious campaign 
for Prussian voting rights is the surest way to parry, in advance, a blow 
against Reichstag voting rights. The resolute and persistant follow-through of 
the voting rights struggle would simultaneously have been a defensive action 
against the reaction’s hankering for a coup d’etat – an action which would have 
had all the advantages of an offense over a forced defense.

Now Comrade Kautsky objects – and this is his last trump – that since the mass 
strike has not, as we see, broken out, that is the best proof how little it 
flowed from the situation and how mistaken my standpoint was:

``But the very fact that it is still being debated shows that the situation is 
still not this ripe. As long as one can still dispute and investigate whether 
or not the mass strike is opportune, the proletariat as a collective mass is 
not filled with that mass exasperation and sense of strength which are 
necessary if the mass strike is to be accomplished. If the necessary mood for 
it had been present in March, then a dissuasive voice like mine would have been 
smothered under a protest, of raging anger.``

Here Comrade Kautsky shows an interesting oscillation between extremes: now the 
mass strike is a coup carefully hatched in the inner sanctum of the war 
council, secretly prepared in whispers; now it is “an elemental upheaval whose 
commencement cannot be brought about at will, which one can await but not 
arrange.” I feel that the task of the Social Democratic Party and its 
leadership consists neither the secretive hatching of “great plans” nor the 
“awaiting” of elemental upheavals. Mass’’ strikes – as I clearly stated in my 
first article in the Dortmund Arbeiter-Zeitung – cannot be “made” by an order 
from the “supreme command,” they must arise from the masses and their advancing 
action. But politically, in the sense of an energetic tactic, a powerful 
offensive, to so lead this action forward that the masses are ever more 
conscious of their tasks – that the party can do, and that is also its duty. 
Social Democracy cannot artificially create a revolutionary mass movement; but, 
circumstances permitting, it can certainly cripple the finest mass action 
through its wavering, feeble tactics. Proof is furnished by the aborted, or 
rather, the immediately countermanded voting rights mass strike of 1902 in 
Belgium.[C] How effectively the party can prevent a mass strike, this 
“elemental upheaval,” by putting on the brakes under certain circumstances, 
even when the masses are battle-ready to the highest degree – Comrade Kautsky 
himself has reported this with regard to Austria. “But even though,” he tells 
us:

``Even though conditions in Austria favor a mass strike far more than they do 
here, and even though the Austrian masses were temporarily aroused to a level 
from which we in Germany remain far distant, to such an agitation that they 
could only be held back from launching into a mass strike by the utmost 
exertion of all forces; and finally, even though repeatedly and in the most 
positive way “threatened” with the mass strike, the comrades responsible for 
the tactics of the party have violently put on the brakes and prevented one up 
till now. [Neue Zeit, XXIV, 2, p.856.]``

It is self-explanatory that this obstructive role of the party leadership could 
appear most actively in Germany, in view of the extraordinarily developed 
organizational centralism and discipline in our party. As I earlier wrote in my 
article “What Next?”:

``In a party where, as in Germany, the principle of organization and party 
discipline is so unprecedentedly cherished, and where in consequence the 
initiative of unorganized popular masses -their spontaneous, so to speak 
improvised capacity for action, such a significant, often decisive factor in 
all previous great political struggles – is nearly ignored, then it is the 
inescapable duty of the party to demonstrate the worth of this so highly 
developed organization and discipline event for great actions, and their worth 
even for other forms of struggle than parliamentary elections.``

The past fate of the Prussian voting rights movement almost seems to 
demonstrate that our organizational apparatus and our party discipline prove 
themselves better, just now, at braking than at leading great mass actions. 
When even in advance the street demonstrations are timidly and reluctantly 
worked out; when every necessary opportunity to raise the demonstrations to a 
higher power – like March 18, like the 1st of May – is embarrassingly shunned: 
when our own victories like the conquest of our right to the streets on April 
10, as well as the defeats of the enemy like the withdrawal of the government 
bill are left totally unexploited; when finally the demonstrations are put back 
on the shelf after all and the masses are sent home; in short, when everything 
is done to hold back, to cripple the mass action, to deaden the militancy: then 
obviously that tempestuous movement cannot arise from the masses, which must 
vent itself in a mass strike.

Naturally the obstructive effect of such leadership is most nearly decisive 
when the action is still in its initial stages – as is the case with us in 
Germany, where it is just taking its first steps. If once the revolutionary 
period is fully unfolded, if the clouds of battle are already rising high, then 
no brake-pulling by the party leaders will be able to accomplish much, for the 
masses will simply shove aside their leaders who set themselves against the 
storm of the movement. Thus could it also happen in Germany, one day. But in 
the interest of Social Democracy, I find it neither necessary nor desirable to 
steer that way. If we in Germany unquestioningly wait with the mass strike 
until the masses, with “raging anger,” storm right over their brake-pulling 
leaders, this obviously can happen only at the expense of the influence and 
prestige of Social Democracy. And then it could easily appear that the 
complicated organizational apparatus and the strict party discipline of which 
we are justly proud are, unfortunately, only a first-rate makeshift for the 
parliamentary and union daily routine; and with the given disposition of our 
leading circles they are a hindrance to the mass action in the grand style, to 
what is demanded by the coming era of violent struggles.

And in the same connection, another especially weak point in our organizational 
relations could have a disastrous effect. If the union leaders had publicly 
come out on their own against the slogan of the mass strike in the latest 
voting rights campaign, it would only have clarified the situation and 
sharpened the critique of the masses. But that they didn’t have to do this, 
that instead through the medium of the party and with the aid of the party 
apparatus they could throw the total authority of Social Democracy into the 
balance to put the brakes on the mass action – that has brought the voting 
rights movement to a standstill, and Comrade Kautsky has merely provided the 
theoretical music.

Yet in spite of all this our cause moves forward. The enemy works for us so 
unceasingly, it is through no merit of our own that we’re in the clover both in 
and out of season. Yet in the end it is not the task of the class party of the 
proletariat simply to live on the sins and errors of its enemies despite its 
own errors, but to accelerate the course of events through its own energy and 
to release, not the minimum, but the maximum of action and class struggle in 
that impulse.

And when in the future the mass action again arises, then the party will face 
exactly the same problem it did two years ago and last spring. After these two 
trials, the broad circles of our party comrades must from now on clearly 
understand that a real mass action in the grand style can only be kindled and 
at length maintained when treated, not as a dry practice piece played to the 
time of, the party leadership’s baton, but as a great class struggle in which 
all significant economic conflicts must be utilized to the full and all forces 
which arouse the masses must be guided into the vortex of the movement, and in 
which one doesn’t shun a mounting intensification of the situation and decisive 
struggles, but goes to meet them with resolute, consistent tactics. Perhaps the 
present discussion will contribute its part to this.