MIA  >  Archive  >  Mandel

 


E. Germain



THE THEORY OF “STATE CAPITALISM”


(June 1951)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From FOURTH INTERNATIONAL, Vol.12 No.5, September-October 1951,
pp.145-156.
Translated from QUATRIÈME INTERNATIONALE.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the MARXISTS’ INTERNET
ARCHIVE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The prevailing ideas of what exists in Russia today are those of “state
capitalism” and “Soviet imperialism.” These are the conceptions of the
ruling bourgeois class which tries to attribute to the Soviet
bureaucracy all of its own sins – without the saving grace of
“democracy.” At the same time, they provide the principal pretext for
petty bourgeois intellectuals not to “take sides” in the gigantic class
struggle developing on a world scale – when and if these ideas

don’t serve the purpose of going over bag and baggage into the bourgeois
camp. The theory of state capitalism is defended not only by the Social
Democracy, whose theoreticians no one takes seriously, and by
insignificant ultra-leftist groups, but also by the representatives of a
new and victorious proletarian revolution – by the leaders of the
Yugoslav Communist Party, Milovan Djilas and Edward Kardelj. [1]

Djilas begins his analysis with the phenomenon of the _bureaucracy_
within the dictatorship of the proletariat. “The tendency toward
domination by the bureaucracy” is, according to him, one of the laws of
the transition period (p. 65). He explains this idea only by saying that
the bureaucratic tendencies “are strongest where the productive forces
are least developed, and the state is obliged for a longer period to
retain in its own hands the administration of the means of production
... and to play the role of mobilising the small producers and small
owners” (p.67).

Two different questions are obviously mixed up here. The Marxist
classics have always been of the, opinion – and Lenin assembled most of
these opinions, in addition to giving his own, in STATE AND REVOLUTION –
that a _bureaucratic tendency_, that _some kind of bureaucracy_ would
continue to exist on the morrow of the proletarian revolution. Such a
bureaucracy, a natural heritage of the capitalist regime, would have to
be _immediately_ curbed by the introduction of laws for the election and
recall of all functionaries, and the reduction of their salaries to that
of the average worker. The “workers in arms,” as Lenin said, would
reduce the bureaucrats to the role of “simple administrators.” The
bureaucracy would disappear to the extent that the administrative
functions come to be carried out by all the producers, each taking a
turn. A tendency toward _domination_ by a bureaucracy in the transition
society was never foreseen either by Marx, or Engels, or Lenin.
 

Origin of Power of Soviet Bureaucracy

The problem obviously becomes more complicated by the practical
experience of the USSR and of Yugoslavia itself, that is, of
economically _backward workers’ states_ isolated in the midst of a
hostile capitalist world. Here the question is posed not only of the
_survival_ of certain bureaucratic phenomena of capitalist origin, but
also of the powerful development of a _new_ bureaucracy whose material
origins have to be determined.

As long as the level of development of the productive forces does not
permit man’s elementary needs to be satisfied, the “struggle for
individual existence,” as Engels said in ANTI-DÜHRING, will continue to
dominate everyday life. Because of this, individual consumption and
socialist accumulation must enter into conflict with one another, while
the tendency toward primitive accumulation reappears of necessity
“within all the pores of the planned economy” (Trotsky). Under these
conditions, it is inevitable _in the long run_ that there should appear
an _arbiter_, a _regulator_ for the distribution of the insufficient
rations in the person of the bureaucrat who settles the thousands of
daily conflicts between the peasant and the workers, the producer and
the administrator, the consumer and the distributor. This arbiter,
having enormous powers concentrated in his hands, will tend to utilize
them above all else – under conditions of general scarcity – in such a
way as to assure himself of the better morsels. It is also inevitable
that _in the long run_, a proletariat which represents numerically a
restricted minority in society, and which is itself subject to the same
tyranny of need, should lose control over these bureaucrats and in turn
be controlled and dominated by them. It is impossible for a class which
if inadequately fed and clothed to engage continually over a period of
years in political activity of the highest level – and it is only
through such activity that the “armed workers” can permanently exercise
control over the bureaucracy.

As early as 1845, Marx wrote in THE GERMAN IDEOLOGY that a “great
increase in the productive forces ... is an absolutely necessary
practical prerequisite (for a socialist economy) for the very reason
that, without it, naked want would become generalized, and as a
consequence, the struggle for necessities and all the old ... crap would
of necessity reappear.”

The Mensheviks based themselves on this truism, generally accepted by
all Marxists, in accusing the Bolsheviks of _utopianism_ when they
wanted to conquer power in Russia in 1917. What did Lenin reply in his
pamphlet WILL THE BOLSHEVIKS KEEP POWER? The prime function of the
Russian revolution is to unleash the proletarian revolution in the
advanced countries of Western Europe. A fusing of the Russian revolution
with the victorious revolution in these countries would supply Russia
with the material base indispensable for the building of a socialist
economy and for the maintenance and development of the workers’ state.
Otherwise this state would succumb to internal and external capitalist
forces. This was the _only perspective_ envisaged by all the Bolsheviks
in the period immediately preceding and following the October
Revolution.

The end of the first postwar wave of revolutionary struggles in 1921
obliged the Bolshevik leaders to re-examine this question. Remaining
isolated in the midst of a hostile capitalist world and not possessing
the material prerequisites for the construction of a socialist economy,
Soviet Russia was obliged to elaborate a new strategy in order to “hold
on” longer in this unforeseen situation, until the international
revolution would come to her rescue. Lenin correctly turned to the NEP
(the New Economic Policy) as the best means of attaining this end. But
at the same time he saw clearly and with anxiety the daily growth of the
bureaucracy within the country, a problem to which he devoted all the
rest of his active life.

The growth of _bureaucracy_ was inevitable under the given conditions.
Was its _victory_ also inevitable? To think so is to isolate the
development of Russia from that of the rest of the world. There was a
serious revolutionary crisis in Germany in 1923. There was the British
general strike in 1926, opening up great revolutionary possibilities in
that country. There was, above all, the great and immensely promising
Chinese Revolution of 1925-27. The victory of a single one of these
revolutions would have completely reversed the relationship of forces
between the bureaucracy and the proletariat in the USSR. That is why the
Trotskyist Left Opposition, which from 1923 to 1927 battled for
leadership of the party and the country, fought not only on a platonic
platform of “struggle against the bureaucracy,” but from 1923 on
proposed a series of _concrete_ economic and political measures, and an
international strategy which would give to the struggle against the
bureaucracy a solid base, by permitting increasing political activity by
the proletariat. The measures for planned industrialization, which the
Left Opposition proposed in 1923, had the aim of, immediately raising
the standard of living of the proletariat, without which it was vain to
hope for a revival of a high level of political activity on the part of
the masses exhausted by six years of sacrifices.

But under conditions of _prolonged isolation_ of the Russian revolution,
no political orientation of the leadership of the Russian CP could have
prevented the victory of the bureaucracy _in the long run_. The question
can be posed no differently for Yugoslavia, nor for any other backward
country where the proletarian revolution triumphs. The recognition of
the bureaucratic danger by the party leadership is a great step forward
and facilitates the struggle against this danger. But, in addition, the
material source of this danger must be understood. No legal measures
whatever can by themselves overcome this danger _in the long run_. [2]
It can only be overcome by the international extension of the revolution
to the advanced industrial countries. That is why, while greeting the
progressive measures to combat bureaucratism taken by the Yugoslav
Communist Party in 1950, we have emphasized from the first that only the
international extension of the revolution can both economically and
socially deliver the decisive blow against the bureaucracy.
Economically, it would permit the elementary needs of society to be met
and would thus eliminate the “struggle for individual existence”
(unfortunately as predominant today in Yugoslavia as it is in Russia)
which causes the “old crap ... to reappear.” Socially, it would transfer
control over the functionaries to “workers in arms” of an advanced
country, thus affording the proletarian forces which have been exhausted
by years of sacrifices a breathing spell for a transition period, so as
to enable them to resume their march forward with redoubled
revolutionary energy. It is Utopian to think that ill-fed workers can
effectively _direct_ the economy _over a period of years_ without first
trying to ameliorate their own individual lot. Heroism is capable of
great feats, but not uninterruptedly for decades.
 

From State Ownership to State Capitalism

Instead of examining such _real_ problems as the material base of
bureaucratic power, instead of analyzing _concretely_ the history of the
bureaucracy’s rise to power, Djilas prefers to devote himself to a
confused analysis of the “contradictory development of the dictatorship
of the proletariat” which has no few surprises in store for us.

“The social difference between state capitalism and socialism at the
outset ... is not solely a difference in the tendencies of their
evolution (under socialism, toward the complete victory of communism and
the withering away of the state; under capitalism, toward the
maintenance of capitalist relations and the “eternalization” of the
state). Neither is it a difference in their solicitude for the laboring
masses, nor a difference resulting from the introduction of a different
system of remuneration, of a socialist system; it resides in the very
notion and essence of ownership. The first form of socialist ownership
is, necessarily, in the beginning state ownership, and is accompanied by
corresponding socialist relations (however insufficiently developed they
may be). In reality, the whole problem can be reduced to that of the
character of the state itself, the one bourgeois and the other
proletarian; the first giving an impetus to the strengthening of the
bureaucratic forces and state capitalism, the second advancing the
importance of the role of the direct producers and the liquidation of
the role of the state in the economy. Society as a whole must produce a
surplus if it is to expand and go forward ... And who is it that
appropriates and divides the surplus value under the state capitalist
regime on the one hand and under the early phase of the socialist regime
on the other, while the state still plays an autonomous role? In both
cases it is the state. But here also there are essential differences
resulting from preceding developments: state capitalism distributes this
surplus value to the bureaucrats in large salaries and privileges, and
utilizes it for the re-enforcement of various enterprises and of
capitalism as a whole, while the socialist state employs it to build
socialism and to remunerate workers and employees in an equitable
fashion ...” (pp.19-20).

It is hard to believe one’s eyes! First it is claimed that the
difference between state capitalism and the “first phase of socialism”
_is not to be found solely_ in their different evolutionary tendencies,
and ten lines further on the whole problem is “reduced” to these very
tendencies! First we are told that the difference between state
capitalism and the transitional society _does not lie solely_ in the
difference in remuneration (“the difference in their solicitude for the
workers”) and twenty lines further on the whole question is explained
precisely by this difference! The difference between capitalist and
socialist accumulation is explained solely on the basis of privileges,
winding up with the grandiose tautology that “state capitalism advances
capitalism” while “the socialist state . . . builds socialism.” In this
way the circle is closed by _begging_ the question. This kind of logic
has been reserved until now for theologians to demonstrate the unity of
God with the trinity. The sudden appearance of “state capitalism” within
the dictatorship of the proletariat is no less deep a mystery than the
Immaculate Conception.

While the “_saltos mortales_” of Djilas’ thinking are unable to give a
material base to the theory of state capitalism [3] his thinking
nevertheless has a very solid “material base” of its own. Djilas not
only has to prove that there _is_ state capitalism in the USSR; he must
also prove that there is _no_ state capitalism in Yugoslavia.
Unfortunately for him, the Cominformist faction of the YCP had in fact
defined the social nature of Yugoslavia as state capitalist and was
answered – by Kidric in particular – with arguments of considerable
value. (See Kidric’s report to the Fifth Congress of the YCP and his
articles in No.2 of the theoretical review, THE COMMUNIST, 1947.) That
is why Djilas is obliged in the last analysis to bring the whole
question back to the tendency toward the withering away of the state.
[4] Also, this withering away of the state must in the first place
_begin on the economic plane._ That is what permits him to base the
difference between the social nature of the USSR and that of Yugoslavia
exclusively on the law concerning the workers’ councils introduced in
Yugoslavia in March, 1950.
 

The Withering Away of the State

For the state to wither away on the economic plane, the following is
necessary:

1. “Such prerequisites ... already realized in most of the advanced
capitalist countries, then the ‘training and discipline’ of millions of
workers by the socialized apparatus (of production) ... With such
_economic_ prerequisites (Lenin’s emphasis) it is perfectly possible . .
. after the overthrow of the capitalists and their functionaries, to
replace them in the business of control of labor and products ... by the
armed workers, the whole people in arms.” (STATE AND REVOLUTION,
COLLECTED WORKS, XXI, p.229.) These conditions were not present in the
USSR either in 1917 or in 1927, and are only today beginning to come
into existence. They are far from present in Yugoslavia.

2. The disappearance of the tendency toward primitive accumulation. That
is, a level of development of the productive forces where economic
procedure _automatically_ favors the stabilization of collective
ownership and planning rather than their disorganization and anarchy.
Such a degree of development has not yet been attained today in the
USSR, not to speak of Yugoslavia, and will probably not be attained in
any country without the victory of world socialism. “With us,” said
Lenin, “the economic origin of bureaucratism ... is isolation, the
dispersion of the small producers, their misery, lack of culture, the
absence of roads, illiteracy, the absence of _exchange_ between
agriculture and industry, the lack of any liaison or any reciprocal
action between them.” (_On the Taxes in Kind_, SELECTED WORKS, II,
p.873, French Edition.) It is like this in Yugoslavia also, as in any
backward country after the victory of the proletariat. This means that
for a long time _after_ the state begins to wither away in matters of
repression, justice, education, etc., it will continue to exercise a
directing role on the economic plane. Even today collective property and
planning remain in the USSR only due to the coercion of the state. The
present level of development of the productive forces in the USSR does
not yet consolidate this economic base. On the contrary, it still
reproduces constantly tendencies toward individual enrichment.

The withering away of the stale, in the true sense of the term, is only
possible when there are no longer antagonistic classes in society. That,
in turn, requires an end to the conflict between city and country. The
contention of the Stalinist theoreticians that the antagonism between
the working class and the peasantry has disappeared in the USSR is
refuted by daily economic reality. In Yugoslavia this antagonism between
the proletariat and the peasantry is all the more real because private
property of the soil continues to exist. The beginning of the famine
last year was marked by a recrudescence of unmitigated speculation and
primitive accumulation on the part of peasant strata. Only the
intervention of the state could to some extent protect the worker from
this pressure by the greedy. The social character of this state is
clearly revealed by this action, and every sincere revolutionist can
only applaud the coercion which was required to combat the hoarders. But
it was not exactly proof that the state is “withering away.”

Djilas quotes a long passage from STATE AND REVOLUTION in which Lenin
affirms that the workers’ state is a state “which is already no longer a
state” in the proper sense of the term. “Therefore the workers’ state
begins to wither away immediately,” Djilas concludes. He would have done
better to read more attentively the entire chapter on the question.

“Once the majority of the people _itself_ suppresses its oppressors a
‘special force’ for suppression is no longer necessary. _In this sense
the state begins to wither away_.” That is what Lenin wrote word for
word.

In other words, the “withering away” of the state is effected not
through its economic action but _through the replacement of the standing
army and the organised police force, that is, of a corps of
functionaries completely apart from the people_. On this plane, however,
the Yugoslav state is not withering away at all. On the contrary, Djilas
is obliged to terminate his work devoted to the withering away of the
state with a panegyric on the UDBA, the Yugoslav secret police, “a
special force of suppression”, if ever there was one. We do not doubt at
all that this UDBA has rendered numerous services in the struggle
against the bourgeois counter-revolution and against the cominformists.
Nevertheless, its existence, like the existence of the Cheka in Russia,
is not a proof of the strength, but of the weakness of the revolution.
It proves that under certain concrete historical conditions, where the
proletariat is too small a fraction of the entire people, the exercise
of the force of suppression by the “armed people” is still impossible,
and that forces of suppression detached from the people are still
necessary. Only petty-bourgeois moralists can find in this fact a
“condemnation” of either the Russian or the Yugoslav revolutions. But
all the same we have the right to say under these conditions: please,
stop prating about the withering away of the state.

It is clear that in the economic sphere Djilas confounds the development
of _socialist democracy_ with the withering away of the state, while
even his own quotation from Lenin recalls that democracy is _only a
specific form of state_. The law on the workers’ councils signifies that
the management of the factories is becoming “democratized.” Instead of
being exercised by _appointed_ functionaries, it is _beginning_ to be
exercised by elected workers’ delegates, even by workers elected in
rotation. It is an important step forward which we heartily applaud. But
these workers continue to exercise a _state function._ Without the
regulating role of the state, socialist accumulation which as in any
backward country, is being achieved above all at the expense of the
peasantry, would be unrealizable. And if the Yugoslav communists are
_obliged_ today by the joint pressure of imperialism and the peasantry
to relax this regulating function of the state slightly, to lift
partially restrictions on prices, to permit to a certain extent “the
free play of economic laws,” this represents only a concession to the
forces of an enemy class that is undoubtedly inevitable under the
present conditions. It would have been more honest to have said so, as
Lenin did at the time of the NEP, rather than to speak of the “withering
away of the state on the economic plane.” [5]

The Yugoslav communist Zarko Stilinovic explains the origin of the
recent “liberation of prices” as follows:

“These changes in foreign prices oblige us to make readjustments in our
domestic prices. Actually, the prices of articles we import (cotton,
linen, paper, for example) have risen much more than those we export
(lead, leather, etc.). Experience has shown, on the other hand, that the
planned uniform prices could not be maintained under the pressure of the
private peasant proprietors, given our limited capacity for the
production of industrial goods that are in great demand.”

Experience has shown, above all. that measures presented as the
“withering away of the state on the economic plane” are really the
result of the pressure of hostile class forces. Experience also shows,
incidentally, that the theory of building “socialism in one country” is
a petty bourgeois Utopia.
 

The Laws of Monopoly Capitalism in the USSR

As we have seen, Djilas is incapable of proving the existence of “state
capitalism” in the USSR on the basis of his references to the Marxist
theory of the state and of property. There remains one last contention
to refute. It is a point of serious import, to be sure, but Djilas is no
more capable of proving this point than the others. Namely, that in the
USSR the “laws of capitalist monopoly ... are raging with all their
brutality” (p.23).

The economic categories of “value, commodity, money, rent etc.” appear
in “unforeseen” fashion in the USSR. Does this indicate that we are
dealing with a capitalist economy there? These categories obtain in
Soviet economy _just as they do in any transitional economy between
capitalism and socialism_. These “categories” cannot be “abolished.”
They wither away to the extent that, with the higher development of the
productive forces, an economy comes into being, based exclusively on the
production of use values to satisfy the needs of the people – an economy
without social antagonisms. The “withering away” of these categories
accompanies the withering away of classes and of the state. Is Djilas
aware of the famous passage in Engels’ HOUSING QUESTION which states
that “after the working masses have taken possession of all the
instruments of _labor_ ... the suppression of land ownership does not
imply the suppression of ground rent but its return to society, of
course, in a modified form”? Does not the “struggle for absolute ground
rent” in the USSR, to which Djilas refers (p. 26), take place also in
Yugoslavia? What else does the compulsory delivery of agricultural
products to the state signify?

It is true that Engels adds that ground rent would exist in the
transitional society _in modified form_. The same holds true for all the
other economic categories enumerated by Djilas. The law of value also
applies in the USSR, but not in its capitalist form. Under capitalism
commodities are not exchanged in proportion to the “labor time socially
necessary to produce them,” but rather in proportion to the fraction of
the total social capital put into motion at the time of their
production. (Law of the equal distribution of the rate of profit.) In
the USSR the operation of the law of value, far from being regulated by
profit; is modified by the _conscious pressure of the plan_. Money,
which under capitalism is a means of exchange as well as the measure of
value and potential capital – that is, a means of obtaining a revenue
called interest – has lost this last function to a large extent in the
USSR. Prices, which under capitalism fluctuate around value in
accordance with the blind laws of the market, in Soviet economy become
the principal instrument for accumulation, without thereby losing their
deep roots in the law of value.

Capitalist economy is an economy based on _profit_. Profit seeking is
the sole motive force in all economic life. The accumulation of capital
is regulated by the laws flowing from this search for profit. _The law
of the falling rate of profit_ is the law of development par excellence
in capitalist economy. That is the fundamental law which determines the
transformation of the economy of free competition into that of monopoly
capitalism. This law explains the movement of capital in all capitalist
countries toward those sectors where a formidable mass of accumulated
capital does not bear down with all its weight upon the rate of profit.
This law explains why, in Nazi Germany as well as in the USA, the
development of the steel industry during the last war was much lower
than the average overall development of industry, in spite of the
pressing needs of war industry.

In the USSR, this characteristic law of monopoly capitalism does not
operate at all. The accumulation of capital, regulated by the plan, does
not flow from the basic sectors to the peripheral sectors as in _all
capitalist countries today_. [6] On the contrary, it moves from the
peripheral sectors to the basic sectors. The rate of development of
heavy industry remains greater and shows no tendency whatever to
diminish.

Because monopoly capitalism is an economy ruled by profit, it has been
characterized for several decades by failure to apply thousands of
inventions and technical improvements, which would risk devaluating
enormous masses of capital in various monopolized sectors. This law has
operated without limits in Nazi Germany as well as in the USA, in spite
of the needs of the armament industry. [7] Can Djilas give us a single
example of this in the Soviet economy?

The export of capital of the imperialist epoch is the direct consequence
of the decline in the rate of profit in the industrialized metropolitan
countries. We see immediately how absurd it would be to speak of such a
phenomenon in connection with the economy of the USSR which is not ruled
by profit at all. In fact, the only example of the “export of capital”
which Djilas can find in the USSR is an example of doubtful character,
as he himself indicates (p.52): the seizure of German and Japanese
property in the former enemy countries of the USSR (Hungary, Rumania,
Bulgaria, the occupation zone in Austria, Manchuria when it was occupied
immediately following the war) and the seizure of numerous factories and
transport material in Eastern Germany. In reality, the reproach which
Popovich justly addressed to the Soviet bureaucracy in his pamphlet on
“Economic Relations Between Socialist States” was not at all that the
USSR “exports capital” to the buffer countries, but, on the contrary,
that it does _not!_ These countries, lacking industrial and agricultural
equipment, would be very glad to receive it from the USSR. If they
complain, it is because instead of “exporting capital” to them, the
Soviet bureaucracy plunders their industrial equipment.

To all these arguments proving that _not one_ of the laws of development
of monopoly capitalism is applicable to the USSR, the reply is sometimes
made that the USSR represents a “capitalist” country of a special type
in the world today: it is a country which is still in its period of
“primitive accumulation,” which is “under-capitalized,” so to speak,
while the other imperialist countries suffer from a plethora of capital.
This reply is based on a vulgar confusion between the _physical mass_ of
capital and its _value_; between use values and exchange values. The
“overcapitalization” of the USA does not at all rest on the fact that
there are too many machines, automobiles, and other goods, from the
point of view of the _physical_ possibilities of consumption in the USA.
On the contrary, even today millions of Americans have an income lower
than the most modest subsistence standards. The “plethora of capital”
signifies solely that from the _point of view of investments bringing an
average rate of profit_, this capital is superfluous and seeks a
profitable outlet elsewhere. If tomorrow the USSR became a capitalist
country integrated as a regular part of world capitalist economy, with
its productive forces developed to the present level, the so-called
“under-capitalization” of the USSR _on the plane of use values_
(physical shortage of machinery, raw materials, finished products per
capita) would not in the least hinder Russian capital from inundating
China, where a higher rate of profit could be obtained than that
realizable in Russia itself.

In reality, the very possibility of building the formidable industrial
power acquired by the USSR in 25 years, _unhampered by the pressure of
accumulated capital on the capitalist world market_, demonstrates that
we are not dealing with a capitalist economy. No capitalist economy
could free itself from the pressure of this capital. The monopoly of
foreign trade, unrealizable in any capitalist country, is one of the
principal conquests of the October Revolution still remaining today.
Under its protection planning can develop and the USSR is protected from
the laws of development of monopoly capitalism which operate on the
world market.

Because capitalist economy is an economy for profit, the contradictions
inherent in capitalism – particularly the _inevitable disproportion_
between the different sectors of production – periodically provoke
abrupt interruptions’ in the _realisation_ of this profit which is the
_raison d’être_ of capitalism. The movement of capitalist economy this
acquires the spasmodic and cyclic character which is peculiar to it,
swinging abruptly from periods of stagnation and crisis to periods of
growth and upswing. This movement, peculiar to capitalism, is valid _for
the entire world market_, for all capitalist countries. Not one of these
countries could escape the effects of the great crisis of 1929-33. The
crisis of 1937-38 was felt by every capitalist country, including Nazi
Germany. The “recession” in American economy in 1949-50 provoked
analogous movements of varying intensity in all capitalist countries.

By contrast, the Soviet economy did not follow this cyclical curve of
world capitalist production at all. As though by chance, precisely the
periods of world capitalist crisis have been periods of the most
remarkable upswing for the USSR. It is not a question of looking for
“concealed unemployment” in the USSR as Djilas does (p. 28). What
matters is this: is the Soviet economy subject to the cyclical movement
of capitalism that is determined by the fluctuations in the average rate
of profit. [8]

In the USSR we have thus a most peculiar “capitalist” economy: it is not
an economy for profit; it is not an economy integrated in the world
capitalist market; it is not an economy which is subject to the cyclical
movement of capital; it is not an economy governed by any of the laws of
capitalist development. And in addition, it is an economy _without a
capitalist class_; on the contrary, it is an economy born out of the
violent destruction of this class and of the peasant layers of society
who showed a tendency to want to become capitalists. Indeed, very little
remains to justify the designation of this economy as “capitalist.”

There remain the enormous differences in remuneration between the
workers and the bureaucrats. But these differences _in the sphere of
distribution_ do not at all justify the designation of the production as
capitalist. There remains also the foreign policy of plundering the
buffer countries and the counter-revolutionary attacks against
proletarian Yugoslavia. But plunder and counter-revolutionary politics
do not suffice to demonstrate the “brutal harshness of laws of monopoly
capitalism.” Doesn’t it prove however, that the USSR is not a socialist
country? No one but the Stalinist theoreticians and agitators have
claimed that – and they only half believe it themselves.
 

Real Contradictions in the Economy of the USSR

In his vain search for “capitalist contradictions” in Soviet society,
Djilas overlooks the real contradictions in the economy of the USSR.
Because of this, he is incapable of putting his finger on the real
crimes of the bureaucracy. Like any society in transition between
capitalism and socialism, Russian society “must necessarily unite in
itself certain traits and peculiarities of both these forms of the
social economy” (Lenin, _Economy and Politics in the Epoch of the
Dictatorship of the Proletariat_, SELECTED WORKS, French Edition,
p.634). Within it, as Lenin said, the forces of capitalism and of
socialism are engaged in a constant struggle for supremacy. From Lenin’s
time up until the forced collectivization of agriculture, this struggle
between _two fundamentally antagonistic modes of production_ continued
to exist in its essentials: small scale production for the market by
millions of small peasant enterprises, and production by large
industries which were collectivized property. This struggle has today
been decided in favor of the non-capitalist mode of production. This
doesn’t at all mean, however, that no vestige of capitalism remains in
the USSR. Quite the contrary. The struggle has simply been transferred
to another plane, that of distribution. The bureaucracy defends its
privileges on the plane of distribution with remarkable ferocity against
the proletariat. These privileges, the historic origins of which we have
described above, give a bourgeois, _capitalist_ character to the norms
of Soviet distribution. There is nothing astonishing in this. It was
foreseen by none other than

Marx himself, in the well-known section of his CRITIQUE OF THE GOTHA
PROGRAM, and by Engels, in a more general form, when he wrote in
ANTI-DÜHRING:

“Each new mode of production or form of exchange is in the beginning
fettered not only by the old forms and the political institutions
corresponding to them, but also by the _old mode of distribution_. It is
obliged to engage _in a long struggle_ to obtain the mode of
distribution corresponding to it.”

What _is_ new, what was unforeseen by our teachers, is that these “norms
of bourgeois distribution” do not tend to disappear with such a
prodigious development of the productive forces like that in the USSR,
but, on the contrary, are constantly strengthened, continually
accentuating the _social inequality_. This comes from the fact that the
state protects and develops the privileges of the bureaucracy, which
exercises political power on the basis of the given non-capitalist mode
of production (collective ownership of the means of production,
planning, monopoly of foreign trade, etc.). Because of this, what should
have been a normal evolution, proceeding undeviatingly in the direction
of socialism, became a contradictory evolution. The productive forces
demand more and more equality, democratic administration, the adaptation
of the plan to the needs of the masses. The bureaucratic administration
blocking this need is the chief brake on the road of socialist
development. This brake must be eliminated by a _political_ revolution.
Political and not social, because it will change neither the mode of
production nor the property relations, but, on the contrary, will
assure, for the first time, their full expansion.

In protecting its enormous privileges, the bureaucracy does not confine
its reprehensible activity to the plane of distribution alone. The
superannuated, retrograde “norms of distribution” react in their turn
upon production and. introduce a multiplicity of _disorganizing
elements_ which continually tend to disrupt planning. In order to defend
its monstrous privileges, the bureaucracy is obliged to exclude the
proletariat from all participation in the administration of enterprises
and to introduce a regime of terror and spying. Thus the only effective
control, control by the masses, is eliminated from planning. In order to
combat the irresponsibility of the individual bureaucrat, the
bureaucracy is obliged to return to the control of a pure and simple,
strict business accounting. [9]

But this system of accounting inevitably introduces into the Soviet
economy contractual and bilateral relations between trusts, the tendency
to give birth again to a market for the means of production, and the
development of

parallel markets in order to realize targets of the plan recklessly set
up by the planners. At the same time, in reaction to the very low real
income, this gives rise to thieving among the lower ranks of the
bureaucracy, to the flight and migration of the workers, as well as to
waste on a vast scale. This is the result of their whole pernicious
_economic_ activity. This is the only effective criticism of the
bureaucracy. For it attributes to the bureaucracy neither the
Dniepostroi, nor the mechanization of agriculture, but only the fraud,
irresponsibility and violence, odious because useless and disruptive of
the march toward socialism.

Djilas (p.1) does not see what difference there is “in so far as the
amount and the nature of the appropriated surplus value is concerned,
between the general director of a capitalist trust on the one hand and
the formal owners on the other.” “Ordinarily there isn’t any,” he says,
“and when there is, it is occasionally to the detriment of the formal
owners.” But it is necessary to know what is meant by “formal owners.”
It is true that hundreds of thousands of small shareholders possess
infinitely less power and income than the directors of the giant trusts.
But the few large shareholders who control these trusts can, by means of
the bulk of the stocks in their possession, rid themselves of the
directors whenever it suits their purpose. And this happens very often.
It is not due to any whim that directors of big capitalist enterprises
aspire to nothing more than to become in their turn shareholders and
co-owners. Only ownership can _stabilise_ their position. The position
of the individual Soviet bureaucrat is no more stable than that of his
colleague, the American director. He can lose his privileges, which are
tied up solely with his function, for the smallest inattention, and join
the thousands of Soviet “directors” who fill the work camps in Siberia.
That is why he seeks by every possible means to make his privileges
secure for himself and his family. That requires the power to dispose
freely of the means of production beyond the bounds of what appears to
him more and more as _the tyranny of the plan_. Because the state is
opposed to this tendency and remains for this reason a workers’ state
despite its monstrous bureaucratic deformations, there has not been up
to the present a reestablishment of private property in the means of
production. Yet that is what each individual bureaucrat, by the very
_logic_ of his position, desires and strives for. [10]

The _form_ of the surplus produced by every society and the _form_ of
its appropriation are determined by its production relations. This
profound thought which Marx merely touches upon in the third volume of
_Capital_, at the close of the difficult analysis of land rent, is
seized upon by Djilas (p.20). He has no idea of its import. It destroys
his theory of state capitalism from top to bottom. For what is the _form
of appropriation_ specific to capitalism? Does this _form_ still exist
in the Soviet Union? Under capitalism, the surplus social product is
appropriated by the owning class _in the form of money_ following the
sale of merchandise. In the USSR the surplus product is appropriated by
the state _in the form of merchandise_ through the realization of the
plan; the _financial_ bankruptcy of enterprises (which sometimes takes
place in the USSR) has no effect either on this appropriation, or on
accumulation.

But Djilas should have read to the end of the passage from CAPITAL from
which he quotes only the beginning. The rest of this passage really
makes it possible to understand more clearly that the monstrous
degeneration of the workers’ state does not at all signify a qualitative
change in its internal social structure. Marx writes as follows:

“It is always the direct relation of the owners of the conditions of
production to the direct producers which reveals the innermost secret,
the hidden foundation of the entire social construction, and with it of
the political form of the relations between sovereignty and dependence,
in short, of the corresponding form of the state. The _form_ of this
relationship between rulers and ruled naturally corresponds always with
a definite stage in the development of the methods of labor and of its
productive social power. This does not prevent _the same economic basis_
from showing _infinite variations and gradations in its appearance_ even
though its principal conditions are everywhere the same. This is due to
innumerable outside circumstances, natural environment, race
peculiarities, outside historical influences, and so forth, all of which
must be ascertained by careful analysis.” (CAPITAL, Vol. III, p.919.
Kerr edition. Our emphasis.)

These sentences illuminate the problem as though they had been
especially written to apply to the “Russian question.” The Russian
economy is no longer capitalist, for it is no longer the proletariat and
the private owners of the means of production who find themselves face
to face. The _new form_ of the relationship between production and
accumulation (appropriation of the surplus product) corresponds to a
_new stage_ in the development of the productive forces, the stage of
transition between capitalism and socialism. This main economic base, in
view of the interaction of _outside historical influences_ (isolation of
the Russian Revolution) as well as the _natural environment_
(backwardness of old Russia), appears in one of the truly “infinite”
gradations of what the transition society may look like, along with
others such as those, for instance, that could arise in the United
States or Great Britain, or even that variety which we saw in Russia
itself the day after the revolution. But it always remains the same
economic base _as far as the principal conditions arc concerned_, as
long as the relations of production characterizing that society have not
been overthrown.
 

The “New” Tendencies of Capitalism

Every theory has its own logic. Obliged to render his theory of state
capitalism coherent by applying it to world capitalism, Djilas is led
into distorting the tendencies of capitalist development after
falsifying those of the USSR.

In order to show that there is something “new” in present-day capitalism
as compared with the imperialism Lenin described in his key work, Djilas
starts out with an unproven premise in plain contradiction to the facts:
“The transfer of the administration of the economy from the hands of the
hands of the individual capitalist and the legal and formal owner into
the hands of functionaries ... The aggressive and enterprising spirit
leaves the capitalists and passes over to the stimulated functionaries,
in whom ... becomes incarnated capital, or rather, the struggle for the
realization of surplus value.” (p.17) In his eyes it is because of this
that “the measures of state capitalism have taken on enormous
proportions” in the capitalist countries.

The reality – at least in typically capitalist countries like the USA,
Germany, Great Britain, Japan, France and Italy – is altogether
different. The whole history of capitalist ownership is indeed the
history of the destruction of property in favor of an ever narrower
circle of the bourgeois class. This is the very essence of the
underlying tendency of capitalism – that of the concentration and
centralization of capital. But the dialectical character of this
tendency consists in this: that the destruction of the private property
of thousands of small and middle capitalists takes place for the benefit
of the _private property of the monopolists_. The bourgeois
nationalizations, such as those that have taken place in Great Britain,
France, Germany, etc., do not by any means show a tendency to destroy
the private property of the _monopolists._ On the contrary, they tend to
_strengthen_ it by the elimination of unprofitable sectors, etc. That is
why Djilas’ contention (p.24) that the monopolies under capitalism “have
also shown a very powerful ... tendency to _liquidate_ private property”
as such, is so false.

Precisely for the very reason that _monopoly capitalism_ is based on the
_private_ property of the monopolists, there is _no tendency whatever_
in capitalism toward a _single_ and _absolute_ monopoly. On the
contrary. As Lenin always emphasized, “it is just this connection of two
contradictory principles, _competition and monopoly_, which
characterizes imperialism, and it is just that which prepares its
bankruptcy.” (COMPLETE WORKS XX, French edition, p.347.) The whole
history of monopolies in the United States as elsewhere is at the same
time the history of the suppression of competition, and of its
reproduction on the plane of the monopolies themselves as well as within
the spheres crushed by them.

Djilas has read Bettelheim. [10a] But from this work he has retained
nothing other than the not very convincing statistics on “the growth of
the number of functionaries from 19.1% in 1925 ... to 20.4% in 1939” and
the creation

of the Hermann-Goering-Werke! Nothing on the return to private ownership
of numerous capitalist enterprises by the Nazis, after the state had
helped them to their feet again with public funds! Nothing on the
measures of compulsory cartelization under the protection of the state!
Nothing on the fact that the “directors of the economy,” invested with
governmental powers under the Nazis, were the most powerful monopolists
in each industrial sector! It is sad to see how an erroneous theory
makes one incapable even of reading a book objectively.

“When the state intervenes more and more in the capitalist economy, it
does so in order to _strengthen_ the position, the powers, the profits
and property of the monopoly capitalists. In the USSR the state
represents a “single economic monopoly” not by _stabilising_ or
augmenting the position, power, property and profits of monopoly
capitalists, but only after having _destroyed_ them. In the capitalist
countries, the monopolists as a class, have brought the state under
their domination to a degree never before known in the past. They have
themselves become the state, with the growing personal union between the
state officials, the generals and the big capitalists. [11] In the USSR
the state has destroyed the monopolists as a class; it represents an
exact dialectical negation of the contemporary capitalist state.

Proceeding from his erroneous premise, Djilas then arrives at some of
his “new” ideas about contemporary capitalism. “The outright gifts”
offered by the USA to the less developed capitalist countries appears to
him a “new form” of capitalist expansion (pp.43-45). According to him,
“the (American) monopolies are hostile to this kind of business” (p.45)
but hope at the end of the process to _recover_ their super-profits. The
idea that the monopolies are undergoing a decline in profits is also
implicit in the remark (p. 18) that the monopolists are sincere in their
outcries against the “socialist” fiscal measures of the American and
British governments which deprive them of up to 90% of their incomes!
But since the Second World War, the net profits of American corporations
_after taxes_ have reached a peak never known in the past. This kind of
“socialism” is evidently cherished by the monopolists!

Is it necessary to remind Djilas that Kardelj, in his report on the
international situation at the Fifth Congress of the Yugoslav Communist
Party, very accurately characterized these “outright gifts” as
_financing the exports of American industry and agriculture by the
American taxpayer_? (_The Fifth Congress of the YCP_, LE LIVRE YUGOSLAV,
Paris, 1949, pp.314-15.)

What is “new” in all this? When the state buys the surplus agricultural
stocks in the granaries, when it gives huge orders for “public works” to
factories threatened with closing, or when it places armaments orders,
it is always a matter of one and the same function of the state in the
epoch of capitalist decline. Namely, _that of guaranteeing the
continuation of capitalist private profit at the expense of the whole
nation!_ But, of course, Djilas cannot mention this _genuinely_ “new
tendency” because it doesn’t exactly confirm his theory on the
similarity between the USSR and the “state capitalist tendencies” of
Western countries!

Is it necessary to remind Djilas, furthermore, that there is no
difference for a business man between an “outright gift” and an unpaid
“loan” on which interest is not drawn? In this sense, the USA already
“gave outright” some billions of dollars to Great Britain, France,
Belgium and Italy during and after the First World War. Moreover, as
Kardelj correctly told the Fifth Congress of the YCP, American
imperialism utilizes these “outright gifts” at the same time to obtain a
right to oversee and practically a right to control the whole economy,
the investment and foreign trade policy, as well as the colonial domain,
of the countries so “generously aided.” Can Djilas dare to deny these
facts, known to all, and of which the European bourgeois have so openly
complained? Why do these genuinely _new facts_ abruptly disappear from
Djilas’ analysis?

Passing over the many contradictions contained in Djilas’ other comments
on the evolution of capitalism, we come to his most important
conclusion. American imperialism can permit itself to seek the road of
peaceful penetration in the colonies and capitals of its competitors
merely by the sheer weight of its cheap goods in free competition
(p.53). The relations between the metropolis and the colonies, moreover,
“become democratized” in the bourgeois sense of the term (p.50). As
against this development, progressive on the whole, there is the USSR,
which “is in no condition to withstand normal capitalist competition,”
and is for this reason obliged to utilize the “old” methods of conquest
and of colonialism “by means of arms.” (p.53)

Isn’t all this monstrous? Only a year ago, on the eve of the Korean War,
the leaders of the YCP and their press declared thousands of times that
the revolutionary struggle of the colonial peoples, their _armed
insurrections_ and wars Of national liberation, represent one of the
predominant aspects of reality today. All these movements are daily
running up against _the growing and unparalleled violence of_ the
imperialist armies. Where and when have the French imperialists
committed so many savage and barbarous actions as in May 1945 in
Algiers, at Madagascar in 1947, and in the Viet Nam for the last five
years? Today all this disappears completely from Djilas’ analysis, is
struck from the map of the world by a single stroke of the pen and
shamelessly replaced by the phrase on the “democratization” (in the
bourgeois sense!) of the relations between the colonies and the
metropolitan centers. What would the millions of Indonesians, Malayans,
Madagascans and Koreans, their brothers tortured, burned alive,
assassinated by imperialism for the sole crime of wishing to be free –
what will they have to say about this new theory of Djilas?

Djilas pretends not to know that precisely the _wealth_ of American
imperialism, the high degree of development of its productive forces,
transform it today into the _aggressive power par excellence_ in this
world. This wealth clashes directly with _the shrinking of the
capitalist world market_, from which not only the USSR and the “new
democracies” but also China, have been withdrawn – and from which a
whole series of other colonial countries, successively liberating
themselves, will soon be withdrawn, just as Nazi Germany, precisely
because of the high degree of development of its productive forces,
suffocated within its Versailles frontiers and headed inexorably toward
war, so American imperialism suffocates today within the frontiers of
that “half of the world” which remains open to it. American imperialism
must conquer the whole world for its capital and goods in order to
survive. But before its capital and goods can penetrate the USSR,
Eastern Europe and China again, it is necessary to destroy the monopoly
of foreign trade, the collective ownership of the means of production,
and the planned economy. This is not possible through “free
competition,” but only by means of cannon fire and atomic bombs. That is
why American imperialism is preparing for war, is compelled to do so
because of the inexorable demands of its economy. That is what lies
concealed behind the fine words about “struggle against Soviet
aggression.”

Djilas is seeking what is “new” in the capitalist world since 1935 but
he fails to mention any of the _truly new_ tendencies which reveal the
hideous physiognomy of capitalism in decay. He says nothing about the
fact that the productive forces are no longer developing on a global
scale, that a development in one country or in one sector is paid for by
enormous destruction in other sectors. Nothing about the verification of
that old prediction of Marx, according to which the productive forces
would be transformed into forces of destruction, if they were not
subjected in time to the conscious control of man. Nothing about the
predominating tendency toward self-financing, which has rendered the
monopoly trusts largely independent of finance capital and has resulted
in a new relationship among them! Nothing about the characteristic fact,
already mentioned, of the “government’s guarantee of capitalist private
profit at the expense of the nation”! Nothing on the fact that the war
economy and rearmament become more and more the “normal” form of
capitalist prosperity! Nothing on the fact that the tendency toward the
_relative_ impoverishment of the proletarians has for some time become a
tendency toward their _absolute_ impoverishment – not only in the
backward countries, but also in such formerly most advanced countries
like Japan, Germany and even Great Britain!

And above all, nothing on this fundamental contradiction of contemporary
capitalism: that the masses instinctively sense this striking breakdown
of the bourgeois “order”; that sudden economic and political crises
impel them again and again onto the road of revolutionary struggle; that
these struggles have become “normal” phenomena not only in the backward
countries but even in advanced countries like Germany, France, Italy,
Belgium (and soon Great Britain.) They reappear there periodically, and
the instinctive impulse of the masses to seize the factories and the
power is the predominating political reality. Yet, this is the reality
upon which every tendency of the workers’ movement which is not
retrogressive and conservative, must base its whole perspective.

Under these conditions, what does Djilas mean by the need for a “change
in the program, tactics, and strategy” of the workers’ movement (p.50)
when _for the first time_ a world situation is developing which
corresponds to the objective premises of the strategy of the first
congresses of the Communist International? What is meant above all by
that strange remark about “the chaos, distrust, and apathy in the
day-to-day activity of the proletariat on our globe,” (p.4) while never
before have so many millions of proletarians been in open, daily,
revolutionary struggle with decaying capitalism? [12]
 

The Yugoslav Revolution and the Theory Of State Capitalism

Djilas started out in his analysis to discover the fundamental factors
behind the surface phenomena. Alas, never has a theoretician been more
blinded by the outward appearance of phenomena and thus rendered
incapable of grasping what is fundamental and essential in the world of
today!

The _theoretical_ origin of this incapacity lies in the pragmatic
character of his thinking. He does not try to get at the objective
truth. His thinking, exactly like the Stalinist thinking which he justly
ridicules for this same reason, strives to justify the “practical” turns
in foreign policy. [13] This pragmatism is furthermore explained by the
fact that in breaking with Stalinism and in seeking – at first in a
sincere and “disinterested” fashion, under the shock produced by the
sudden revelation of the counterrevolutionary nature of Stalinism – a
materialist explanation of the phenomenon of the Soviet bureaucracy, the
leaders of the YCP have never assimilated _theoretically_ the teachings
of the permanent revolution, although they applied in _practice_ its
essential precepts. This lack of theoretical understanding has reacted
in turn upon their practice and has caused it to deviate in an
opportunist direction.

The _social_ origin of this lack of understanding is, however, to be
found elsewhere. Djilas’ theory of state capitalism is to the Yugoslav
Revolution what the theory of “socialism in one country” was to the
Russian Revolution – an attempt at a theoretical justification of the
_conservative back-sliding_ of leaders of a victorious revolution. Just
as for some of the leading layers of the Bolshevik Party after 1923, the
defense of this revolution today becomes for the Yugoslav leaders an
_end in itself_, regardless of the consequences of certain methods and
tactics of “defense” for the international workers’ movement (as well as
for Yugoslavia). What we have before us. therefore, is a _nationalist
deviation of petty-bourgeois origin_, the social roots of which, in
Yugoslavia, must be sought more in its peasant character and in foreign
imperialist pressure than in the strength of the bureaucratic tendencies
which are being combatted by the YCP.

The whole history of the workers’ movement shows that in the long run
the workers’ conquests cannot be _defended_ without being extended. That
is how the necessity of the _permanence_ of the revolution is stated in
its most general form. But only those who show themselves capable of
defending already existing conquests have the right to speak of the
_extension_ of the workers’ conquests. The attitude of the Fourth
International toward the Yugoslav question has for this reason been
consistent in all the different phases through which it has passed. It
is not by accident that the Fourth International was the first tendency
of the international working-class movement – and for months the only
one! – to come to the assistance of proletarian Yugoslavia besieged by
the Kremlin and its infamous blockade. Nor was it by accident that this
same Fourth International subjected to implacable criticism all the
words and actions of the Yugoslav leaders that ever since the Korean War
have gone counter to the interests of the colonial revolution and, for
this reason, also counter to the revolutionary regroupment of the
vanguard in the metropolitan countries. Because Trotskyism has
endeavored for 28 years to subordinate at each turn of the situation the
particular interests of a given layer, a given country or party to the
_general interests_ of the international proletariat, it is “blacker and
more abominable than anything else conceivable in the eyes of the
official Moscow circles.” (Djilas, IBID., p.9). What a pitiful sight it
is to see those who, at their Fifth Congress still designated the
Trotskyists as “fascist spies,” today characterize our movement as
“always dragging along in the tow of Soviet foreign policy.” (Kardelj,
p.94)

Djilas declares that the Soviet bureaucracy has concluded from its
Yugoslav experience that the proletarian revolution is by its very
nature uncontrollable and for this reason dangerous for the Kremlin. We
believe that this realization has been one of the determining factors of
Soviet foreign policy for many years. That is why we have based our
whole struggle against Stalinism on the international extension of the
revolution. That is the only way in which this struggle dovetails with
our overall task, that of helping the masses throughout the entire world
to overthrow capitalism in its death agony. The communist vanguard of
each country comes to this same conclusion again and again by its own
experience. Whether or not there is genuine internal democracy within
the YCP; whether the revolutionary point of view can be expressed or
whether it is silenced by administrative measures [14], we are certain
that we shall sooner or later find the best Yugoslav communists arriving
at this position.

June 10, 1951

 

Top of the page

 

Footnotes

1. All references are taken from No.1 of the magazine QUESTIONS DU
SOCIALISME, published in Paris by the Yugoslav Information Bureau
(April-May, 1951), reproducing the following works: THEMES CONTEMPORAINS
by Milovan Djilas and LA YOUGOSLAVIE DANS LE MONDE ACTUEL by Kardelj.

2. “In words, the Soviet apparatus is within the reach of all the
workers; in reality, as everyone is aware, it is not at all so. Far from
it. And it is not at all the laws that constitute an obstacle ... Our
laws, on the contrary, are favorable. But laws alone do not suffice
here.” Lenin, _Report on Party Program to the Eighth Congress of the
Russian CP_, March 19, 1919. SELECTED WORKS II, p.535 (French edition).

3. In Yugoslavia between 1945 and 1949 the bureaucratic tendencies were
strong and showed no inclination at all to disappear, in the opinion
even of Djilas. Why was there no state capitalism in Yugoslavia at that
time? Because the first stage, the stage when state ownership is
necessary and progressive, had not yet ended, Djilas replies. But what
objective criterion determines the end of this first stage? The
development of the productive forces, says Djilas. But in the USSR the
productive forces continue to develop. Why then is there “state
capitalism” in the USSR? “Because the state is not withering away ...”

4. We note in passing that Djilas tacitly assumes that the same state
apparatus can change its social nature simply as a result of its
“evolutionary tendency.” He appears not to have the faintest suspicion
that the change from “socialism” (in reality, from a workers’ state) to
(state) capitalism signifies a social counter-revolution and
necessitates a complete overthrow of the state structure as well as of
the mode of production.

5. Let us point out that certain measures which the Yugoslavs describe
today under the term “withering away of the state” were introduced in
Russia as early as the mid-Thirties and, from the point of view of
socialist planning, represent an unmistakable retreat, even if it was
inevitable and necessary for an immediate increase in production. This
applies to the increased autonomy of local industry, to the separate and
autonomous business accounting system of each enterprise, etc.

6. This is the reason why no backward capitalist country has been able
to build an important heavy industry, although several (like Argentina,
India and China) possess a well developed manufacturing industry.

7. The development of synthetic gasoline by Germany and of synthetic
rubber by the USA was greatly limited until 1940 by an agreement
concluded in 1926 between the I.G. Farben and Standard Oil trusts,
(Wendell Berge: CARTELS: CHALLENGE TO A FREE WORLD, 1944 pp.210-212).

8. Naturally, Soviet economy also has its crises, like any
non-capitalist economy, but these are crises of. a different nature than
capitalist crises: crises of the _quality_ of merchandise, of labor
productivity, of output, etc.

9. This important reform in Russian economy was introduced after the
second five-year plan. Bogolepov, the Soviet specialist on financial
matters, explains that the individual accounting system of each factory
is the basis of the plan: “The enterprises, which are state property,
are administered as juridically independent enterprises. Each enterprise
receives from the state equipment and capital (money) for its own
exclusive use. It then operates independently, with its own financial
accounting system, its own bank account, with credits which are often
extended to it, and finally with the right to realize a certain profit.”
(THE SOVIET FINANCIAL SYSTEM, 1945, pp.8 and 9).

10. In 1950 Harvard University Press published the work of an American
scholar, Harold J. Herman, JUSTICE IN RUSSIA. This is a work of
exceptional interest. For, in reporting the conflicts with which the
Soviet judicial organs have to deal, it reveals the contradictory nature
of the Soviet economy more clearly than ever. There is a special body
called Gosarbitrazh for regulating lawsuits brought against one another
by the Soviet trusts and combines (there were 330,000 of these lawsuits
in 1938!) or by the state against them. It appears that the trusts are
beginning to sell machines that are temporarily idle; that they had
attempted to sell entire factories; that after the state’s intervention
against these deals, they disguised these sales as leases; that they
drew up fictitious contracts in order to obtain raw materials outside of
the plan; that they utilized numerous subterfuges to avoid applying
legislation on prices, etc.

10a. Charles Bettelheim, French radical economist, author of an
important analytical work on German economy under the Nazis. – _FI_

11. The hypothetical case of “state capitalism” foreseen by Engels in
ANTI-DÜHRING is likewise the opposite of what exists in the USSR, for
the capitalists continue to receive profit, only in the form of revenue
from state bonds instead of dividends from individual stocks. It might
even be said that in this case there was only a formal and fictitious
suppression of private property, _for private property continues to
exist as a source of revenue for a class!_

12. Kardelj went further, saying that “we are living, in fact, in a
period of transition from one social system to another, in the course of
which the economic factors of the new system _have already achieved
victory in the world_” (QUESTIONS ACTUELLES DU SOCIALISM, No.1, p.84).
He was referring to the high level of the productive forces and to the
“state capitalist” measures of the capitalist countries! He should be
reminded of that pointed remark of Lenin: “The ‘proximity’ of such a
capitalism to socialism should serve for the real representatives of the
proletariat as an argument in proving the nearness, ease, feasibility
and urgency of the socialist revolution, and not at all as an argument
for tolerating a repudiation of such a revolution or for making
capitalism more attractive.” (COLLECTED WORKS, XXI, p. 203, STATE AND
REVOLUTION) Nor, we might add, discovering a “new” strategy for the
proletariat!

13. The internal logic of the theory of state capitalism leads the YCP
in its day to day practice to vulgar reformist positions on
international questions with astonishing rapidity. The Cucchi-Magnani
movement in Italy, to which they have given discreet support, has openly
pronounced itself in favor of national defense against “foreign
aggression.” The Yugoslav press has denounced the assistance given by
the Chinese revolution to the Viet-Minh partisans, while Mosha Piyade in
his pamphlet “The Myth of Soviet Aid to the National Yugoslav
Insurrection” stigmatizes the Soviet leadership for not having given
such assistance to the Yugoslav partisans. Finally, the Yugoslav review
World Politics has just declared in its issue of June 6 (p.11) that the
“reform of the (French) electoral system, whose undemocratic character
cannot be denied, can nevertheless be justified for one rather
convincing reason (!), that of the common aspiration (of the parties of
the majority) to defend democracy”!

14. The Yugoslav state has begun to wither away ... Not yet
sufficiently, however, to authorize the publication of Trotsky’s works,
even at the expense of the Fourth International. When Lenin and Trotsky
were in power in Russia they never prevented, to our knowledge, the
ultra-left communists from defending orally and in writing the theory of
state capitalism. It is true that their state was not withering away ...

 

Top of the page

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last updated on 7.12.2005

Save
