
Leon Trotsky



LETTER TO THE WORKERS OF THE USSR


(May 1940)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Written: May 1940.
First Published: FOURTH INTERNATIONAL, Vol.1 No.5, October 1940,
pp.140-141.
Translated: By _FOURTH INTERNATIONAL_.
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters.
Proofread: Scott Wilson
Copyleft: Leon Trotsky Internet Archive (www.marxists.org) 2002.
Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the
terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Greetings to the Soviet workers, collective farmers, soldiers of the Red
Army and sailors of the Red Navy! Greetings from distant Mexico where I
found refuge after the Stalinist clique had exiled me to Turkey and
after the bourgeoisie had hounded me from country to country!

Dear Comrades! The lying Stalinist press has been maliciously deceiving
you for a long time on all questions, including those which relate to
myself and my political co-thinkers. You possess no workers’ press; you
read only the press of the bureaucracy, which lies systematically so as
to keep you in darkness and thus render secure the rule of a privileged
parasitic caste.

Those who dare raise their voices against the universally hated
bureaucracy are called “Trotskyists,” agents of a foreign power; branded
as spies-yesterday it was spies of Germany, today it is spies of England
and France-and then sent to face the firing squad. Tens of thousands of
revolutionary fighters have fallen before the muzzles of GPU Mausers in
the USSR and in countries abroad, especially in Spain. All of them were
depicted as agents of Fascism. Do not believe this abominable slander!
Their crime consisted of defending workers and peasants against the
brutality and rapacity of the bureaucracy. The entire Old Guard of
Bolshevism, all the collaborators and assistants of Lenin, all the
fighters of the October revolution, all the heroes of the Civil War,
have been murdered by Stalin. In the annals of history Stalin’s name
will forever be recorded with the infamous brand of Cain!

Revolution Was Not Made for Bureaucrats

The October revolution was accomplished for the sake of the toilers and
not for the sake of new parasites. But due to the lag of the world
revolution, due to the fatigue and, to a large measure, the backwardness
of the Russian workers and especially the Russian peasants, there raised
itself over the Soviet Republic and against its peoples a new oppressive
and parasitic caste, whose leader is Stalin. The former Bolshevik party
was turned into an apparatus of the caste. The world organization which
the Communist International once was is today a pliant tool of the
Moscow oligarchy. Soviets of Workers and Peasants have long perished.
They have been replaced by degenerate Commissars, Secretaries and GPU
agents.

But, fortunately, among the surviving conquests of the October
revolution are the nationalized industry and the collectivized Soviet
economy. Upon this foundation Workers’ Soviets can build a new and
happier society. This foundation cannot be surrendered by us to the
world bourgeoisie under any conditions. It is the duty of revolutionists
to defend tooth and nail every position gained by the working class,
whether it involves democratic rights, wage scales, or so colossal a
conquest of mankind as the nationalization of the means of production
and planned economy. Those who are incapable of defending conquests
already gained can never fight for new cries. Against the imperialist
foe we will defend the USSR with all our might. However, the conquests
of the October revolution will serve the people only if they prove
themselves capable of dealing with the Stalinist bureaucracy, as in
their day they dealt with the Tsarist bureaucracy and the bourgeoisie.

Stalinism Endangers the Soviet Union

If Soviet economic life had been conducted in the interests of the
people; if the bureaucracy had not devoured and vainly wasted the major
portion of the national income; if the bureaucracy had not trampled
underfoot the vital interests of the population, then the USSR would
have been a great magnetic pole of attraction for the toilers of the
world and the inviolability of the Soviet Union would have been assured.
But the infamous oppressive regime of Stalin has deprived the USSR of
its attractive power. During the war with Finland, not only the majority
of the Finnish peasants but also the majority of the Finnish workers,
proved to be on the side of their bourgeoisie. This is hardly surprising
since they know of the unprecedented oppression to which the Stalinist
bureaucracy subjects the workers of near-by Leningrad and the whole of
the USSR. The Stalinist bureaucracy, so bloodthirsty and ruthless at
home and so cowardly before the imperialist enemies, has thus become the
main source of war danger to the Soviet Union.

The old Bolshevik party and the Third International have disintegrated
and decomposed. The honest and advanced revolutionists have organized
abroad the Fourth International which has sections already established
in most of the countries of the world. I am a member of this new
International. In participating in this work I remain under the very
same banner that I served together with you or your fathers and your
older brothers in 1917 and throughout the years of the Civil War, the
very same banner under which together with Lenin we built the Soviet
state and the Red Army.

Goal of the Fourth International

The goal of the Fourth International is to extend the October revolution
to the whole world and at the same time to regenerate the USSR by
purging it of the parasitic bureaucracy. This can be achieved only in
one way: By the workers, peasants, Red Army soldiers and Red Navy
sailors, rising against the new caste of oppressors and parasites. To
prepare this uprising, a new party is needed-a bold and honest
revolutionary organization of the advanced workers. The Fourth
International sets as its task the building of such a party in the USSR.

Advanced workers! Be the first to rally to the banner of Marx and Lenin
which is now the banner of the Fourth International! Learn how to
create, in the conditions of Stalinist illegality, tightly fused,
reliable revolutionary circles! Establish contacts between these
circles! Learn how to establish contacts through loyal and reliable
people, especially the sailors, with your revolutionary co-thinkers in
bourgeois lands! It is difficult, but it can be done.

The present war will spread more and more, piling ruins on ruins,
breeding more and more sorrow, despair and protest, driving the whole
world toward new revolutionary explosions. The world revolution shall
reinvigorate the Soviet working masses with new courage and resoluteness
and shall undermine the bureaucratic props of Stalin’s caste. It is
necessary to prepare for this hour by stubborn systematic revolutionary
work. The fate of our country, the future of our people, the destiny of
our children and grandchildren are at stake.

DOWN WITH CAIN STALIN AND HIS CAMARILLA! DOWN WITH THE RAPACIOUS BUREAUCRACY! LONG LIVE THE SOVIET UNION, THE FORTRESS OF THE TOILERS! LONG LIVE THE WORLD SOCIALIST REVOLUTION!

Fraternally,
_LEON TROTSKY_
May, 1940

WARNING! Stalin’s press will of course declare that this letter is
transmitted to the USSR by “agents of imperialism.” Be forewarned that
this, too, is a lie. This letter will reach the USSR through reliable
revolutionists who are prepared to risk their lives for the cause of
socialism. Make copies of this letter and give it the widest possible
circulation. _L.T._

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[return] 

Last updated on: 4 February 2014

Save
