
Leon Trotsky



THE CLASS NATURE OF THE SOVIET STATE


(October 1, 1933)

Transcribed and HTML markup for the Trotsky Internet Archive, a subarchive of the Marxists’ Internet Archive in 1998.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


How the Question is Posed

The break with the Communist International and the orientation toward
the new International have posed anew the question of the social
character of the USSR. Doesn’t the collapse of the Communist
International also mean, at the same time, the collapse of that state
that emerged from the October Revolution? Here, indeed, in both
instances one and the same ruling organization is concerned: the
Stalinist apparatus. It has applied identical methods within the USSR as
in the international arena. We Marxists were never patrons of the double
bookkeeping system of the Brandlerites, according to which the policies
of the Stalinists are impeccable in the USSR but ruinous outside the
boundaries of the USSR. [1] It is our conviction that they are equally
ruinous in both instances. If so, isn’t it then necessary to recognize
the simultaneous collapse of the Communist International and the
liquidation of the proletarian dictatorship in the USSR?

At first sight such reasoning appears to be irrefutable. But it is
erroneous. While the methods of the Stalinist bureaucracy are
homogeneous in all spheres, the objective results of these methods
depend upon external conditions or, to use the language of mechanics,
the resistivity of the material. The Communist International represented
an instrument that was intended for the overthrow of the capitalist
system and the establishment of the dictatorship of the proletariat. The
Soviet government represents an instrument for the preservation of
conquests of an already accomplished overturn. The Communist Parties of
the West have no inherited capital. Their strength (in reality, their
weakness) lies within themselves and only within themselves. Nine-tenths
of the strength of the Stalinist apparatus lies not in itself but in the
social changes wrought by the victorious revolution. Still, this
consideration alone does not decide the question, but it does bear a
great methodological significance. It shows us how and why the Stalinist
apparatus could completely squander its meaning as the international
revolutionary factor and yet preserve a part of its progressive meaning
as the gatekeeper of the social conquests of the proletarian revolution.
This dual position – we may add – represents in itself one of the
manifestations of the unevenness of historical development.

The correct policies of a workers’ state are not reducible _solely_ to
national economic construction. If the revolution does not expand on the
international arena along the proletarian spiral, it must immutably
begin to contract along the bureaucratic spiral within the national
framework. If the dictatorship of the proletariat does not become
European and worldwide, it must head towards its own collapse. All this
is entirely incontestable on a wide historical perspective. But
everything revolves around the concrete historical periods. Can one say
that the policies of the Stalinist bureaucracy have led _already_ to the
liquidation of the workers’ state? That is the question now.

Against the assertion that the workers’ state is apparently already
liquidated there arises, first and foremost, the important
methodological position of Marxism. The dictatorship of the proletariat
was established by means of a political overturn and a civil war of
three years. The class theory of society and historical experience
equally testify to the impossibility of the victory of the proletariat
through peaceful methods, that is, without grandiose class battles,
weapons in hand. How, in that case, is the imperceptible, “gradual,”
bourgeois counterrevolution conceivable? Until now, in any case, feudal
as well as bourgeois counterrevolutions have never taken place
“organically,” but they have invariably required the intervention of
military surgery. In the last analysis, the theories of reformism,
insofar as reformism generally has attained to theory, are always based
upon the inability to understand that class antagonisms are profound and
irreconcilable; hence, the perspective of a peaceful transformation of
capitalism into socialism. The Marxist thesis relating to the
catastrophic character of the transfer of power from the hands of one
class into the hands of another applies not only to revolutionary
periods, when history sweeps madly ahead, but also to the periods of
counterrevolution, when society rolls backwards. He who asserts that the
Soviet government has been _gradually_ changed from proletarian to
bourgeois is only, so to speak, running backwards the film of reformism.

Our opponents may deny that this is a general methodological proposition
and declare that no matter how important in itself it is nevertheless
too abstract to solve the question. Truth is always concrete. The thesis
of the irreconcilability of class contradictions should and must direct
us in our analysis but cannot replace its results. One must probe deeply
into the material content of the historical process itself.

We reply, it is true that a methodological argument does not exhaust the
problem. But, in any case, it transfers the burden of proof to the
opposing side. Critics who consider themselves Marxists must demonstrate
in what manner the bourgeoisie that had lost power in a three-years’
struggle could resume this power without any battles. However, since our
opponents make no attempt to invest their appraisal of the Soviet state
with any sort of serious theoretical expression, we shall try to perform
this labor for them here.

“The Dictatorship Over the Proletariat”

The most widespread, popular and, at first sight, irrefutable argument
in favor of the nonproletarian character of the present Soviet state is
based upon the reference to the strangulation of the liberties of
proletarian organizations and to the almightiness of the bureaucracy. Is
it really possible to identify the dictatorship of an apparatus, which
has led to the dictatorship of a single person, with the dictatorship of
the proletariat as a class? Isn’t it clear that the dictatorship of the
proletariat is excluded by the dictatorship _over_ the proletariat?

Such enticing reasoning is constructed not upon a materialistic analysis
of the process as it develops in reality but upon pure idealistic
schemas, upon Kantian norms. Certain noble “friends” of the revolution
have provided themselves with a very radiant conception of the
dictatorship of the proletariat, and they are completely prostrated in
the face of the fact that the real dictatorship with all its heritage of
class barbarism, with all its internal contradictions, with the mistakes
and crimes of the leadership, fails entirely to resemble that sleek
image that they have provided. Disillusioned in their most beautiful
emotions, they turn their backs to the Soviet Union.

Where and in what books can one find a faultless prescription for a
proletarian dictatorship? The dictatorship of a class does not mean by a
long shot that its entire mass always participates in the management of
the state. This we have seen, first of all, in the case of the
propertied classes. The nobility ruled through the monarchy before which
the noble stood on his knees. The dictatorship of the bourgeoisie took
on comparatively developed democratic forms only under the conditions of
capitalist upswing when the ruling class had nothing to fear. Before our
own eyes, democracy has been supplanted in Germany by Hitler’s
autocracy, with all the traditional bourgeois parties smashed to
smithereens. Today, the German bourgeoisie does not rule directly;
politically it is placed under complete subjection to Hitler and his
bands. Nevertheless, the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie remains
inviolate in Germany, because all the conditions of its social hegemony
have been preserved and strengthened. By expropriating the bourgeoisie
politically, Hitler saved it, even if temporarily, from economic
expropriation. The fact that the bourgeoisie was compelled to resort to
the fascist regime testifies to the fact that its hegemony was
endangered but not at all that it had fallen.

Anticipating our subsequent arguments, our opponents will hasten to
rebut: although the bourgeoisie, as an exploiting minority, can also
preserve its hegemony by means of a fascist dictatorship, the
proletariat building a socialist society must manage its government
itself, directly drawing ever-wider masses of the people into the task
of government. In its general form, this argument is undebatable, but in
the given case it merely means that the present Soviet dictatorship is a
sick dictatorship. The frightful difficulties of socialist construction
in an isolated and backward country coupled with the false policies of
the leadership – which, in the last analysis, also reflects the pressure
of backwardness and isolation – have led to the result that the
bureaucracy has expropriated the proletariat politically in order to
guard its social conquests with _its own_ methods. The anatomy of
society is determined by its economic relations. So long as the forms of
property that have been created by the October Revolution are not
overthrown, the proletariat remains the ruling class.

Dissertations upon “the dictatorship of the bureaucracy over the
proletariat” without a much deeper analysis, that is, without a clear
explanation of the social roots and the class limits of bureaucratic
domination, boil down merely to high-faluting democratic phrases so
extremely popular among the Mensheviks. One need not doubt that the
overwhelming majority of Soviet workers are dissatisfied with the
bureaucracy and that a considerable section, by no means the worst,
hates it. However, it is not simply due to repression that this
dissatisfaction does not assume violent mass forms; the workers fear
that they will clear the field for the class enemy if they overthrow the
bureaucracy. The interrelations between the bureaucracy and the class
are really much more complex than they appear to be to the frothy
“democrats.” The Soviet workers would have settled accounts with the
despotism of the apparatus had other perspectives opened before them,
had the Western horizon flamed not with the brown color of fascism but
with the red of revolution. So long as this does not happen, the
proletariat with clenched teeth bears (“tolerates”) the bureaucracy and,
in this sense, recognizes it as the bearer of the proletarian
dictatorship. In a heart to heart conversation, no Soviet worker would
be sparing of strong words addressed to the Stalinist bureaucracy. But
not a single one of them would admit that the counterrevolution has
already taken place. The proletariat is the spine of the Soviet state.
But insofar as the function of governing is concentrated in the hands of
an irresponsible bureaucracy, we have before us an obviously sick state.
Can it be cured? Will not further attempts at cures mean a fruitless
expenditure of precious time? The question is badly put. By cures we
understand not all sorts of artificial measures separate and apart from
the world revolutionary movement but a further struggle under the banner
of Marxism. Merciless criticism of the Stalinist bureaucracy, training
the cadres of the new International, resurrecting the fighting capacity
of the world proletarian vanguard – this is the essence of the “cure.”
It coincides with the fundamental direction of historical progress.

During the last few years – appropriately enough – our opponents have
told us more than once that we “are losing time in vain” by occupying
ourselves with curing the Comintern. We never promised anybody that we
would _cure_ the Comintern. We only refused, until the decisive test, to
pronounce the sick as dead or hopelessly ill. In any case, we did not
waste a single day “curing.” We formed revolutionary cadres, and, what
is no less important, we prepared the fundamental theoretical and
programmatic positions of the new International.

The Dictatorship of the Proletariat as an Idealistic Norm

Messrs. “Kantian” Sociologists (we apologize to the shade of Kant) often
reach the conclusion that a “real” dictatorship, that is, one that
conforms to their ideal norms, existed only in the days of the Paris
Commune, or during the first period of the October Revolution, up to the
Brest-Litovsk peace or, at best, up to the NEP. This is indeed
sharpshooting: aim a finger at the sky and hit the bull’s eye! If Marx
and Engels called the Paris Commune “the dictatorship of the
proletariat” it was only because of the force of the possibilities
lodged in it. But by itself the Commune was not _yet_ the dictatorship
of the proletariat. Having seized power, it hardly knew how to use it;
instead of assuming the offensive, it waited; it remained isolated
within the circle of Paris; it dared not touch the state bank; it did
not and indeed could not put through the overturn in property relations
because it did not wield power on a national scale. To this must be
added Blanquist one-sidedness and Proudhonist prejudices, which
prevented even the leaders of the movement from completely understanding
the Commune as the dictatorship of the proletariat.

The reference to the first period of the October Revolution is not any
more fortunate. Not only up to the Brest-Litovsk peace but even up to
autumn of 1918, the social content of the revolution was restricted to a
petty-bourgeois agrarian overturn and workers’ control over production.
This means that the revolution in its actions had not yet passed the
boundaries of bourgeois society. During this first period, soldiers’
soviets ruled side by side with workers’ soviets, and often elbowed them
aside. Only toward the autumn of 1918 did the petty-bourgeois
soldier-agrarian elemental wave recede a little to its shores, and the
workers went forward with the nationalization of the means of
production. Only from this time can one speak of the inception of a real
dictatorship of the proletariat. But even here it is necessary to make
certain large reservations. During those initial years, the dictatorship
was geographically confined to the old Moscow principality and was
compelled to wage a three-years’ war along all the radii from Moscow to
the periphery. This means that up to 1921, precisely up to the NEP, that
is, what went on was still the struggle to establish the dictatorship of
the proletariat upon the national scale. And since, in the opinion of
the pseudo-Marxist philistines, the dictatorship had disappeared with
the beginning of the NEP, then it means that, in general, it had never
existed. To these gentlemen the dictatorship of the proletariat is
simply an imponderable concept, an ideal norm not to be realized upon
our sinful planet. Small wonder that “theoreticians” of this stripe,
insofar as they do not denounce altogether the very word dictatorship,
strive to smear over the irreconcilable contradiction between the latter
and bourgeois democracy.

Extremely characteristic, from the laboratory and not the political
point of view, is the Parisian sect of “Communist democrats” (Souvarine
and Co.). The very name already implies a break with Marxism. In his
CRITIQUE OF THE GOTHA PROGRAM, Marx rejected the name Social Democracy
in view of the fact that it places the revolutionary socialist struggle
under the formal control of democracy. It is quite obvious that there is
no difference in principle between “communist democrats” and “socialist
democrats,” Social Democrats, that is. There is no hard and fast
partition between socialism and communism. Transgression begins only
when socialism and communism as a movement or as a state are
subordinated not to the actual course of the class struggle, not to the
material conditions of the historical process but to the suprasocial and
suprahistorical abstraction, “democracy,” which, in reality, is a weapon
of self-defense serving the bourgeoisie against the proletarian
dictatorship. If during the epoch of the Gotha Program [1875] it was
still possible to see in the word Social Democracy only an incorrect and
nonscientific name for a proletarian party whose spirit was healthy,
then the entire subsequent history of bourgeois and “social” democracy
turns the banner of “_democratic_ communism (?)” into the banner of an
outright class betrayal. [2]

Bonapartism

An opponent of the Urbahns type will say that there has been really no
restoration of the bourgeois regime as yet but also that there is no
longer a workers’ state; the present Soviet regime is a supraclass, or
an interclass, Bonapartist government. In its own time we settled our
accounts with this theory. Historically, Bonapartism was and remains the
government of the bourgeoisie during periods of crises in bourgeois
society. It is possible and it is necessary to distinguish between the
“progressive” Bonapartism that consolidates the purely capitalistic
conquests of bourgeois revolution and the Bonapartism of the decay of
capitalist society, the convulsive Bonapartism of our epoch (von Papen,
Schleicher, Dollfuss, and the candidate for Dutch Bonapartism, Colijn,
etc.). Bonapartism always implies political veering between classes; but
under Bonapartism in all its historical transmigrations there is
preserved the one and the same social base: bourgeois property. Nothing
is more absurd than to draw the conclusion of the classless character of
the Bonapartist state from the Bonapartist wagging between classes or
from the “supraclass” position of the Bonapartist gang. Monstrous
nonsense! Bonapartism is only one of the varieties of capitalist
hegemony.

If Urbahns wants to extend the concept of Bonapartism to include also
the present Soviet regime, then we are ready to accept such a widened
interpretation – under one condition: if the social content of the
Soviet “Bonapartism” will be defined with the requisite clarity. It is
absolutely correct that the self-rule of the Soviet bureaucracy was
built upon the soil of veering between class forces both internal as
well as international. Insofar as the bureaucratic veering has been
crowned by the personal plebiscitary regime of Stalin, it is possible to
speak of Soviet Bonapartism. But while the Bonapartism of both
Bonapartes as well as their present pitiful followers has developed and
is developing on the basis of a bourgeois regime, the Bonapartism of
Soviet bureaucracy has under it the soil of a Soviet regime.
Terminological innovations or historical analogies can serve as
conveniences in one manner or another for analysis, but they cannot
change the social nature of the Soviet state.

“State Capitalism”

During the last period, Urbahns, incidentally, has created a new theory:
the Soviet economic structure, it appears, is a variety of “state
capitalism.” The “progress” lies in that Urbahns has descended from his
terminological exercise in the sphere of the political superstructure
down to the economic foundation. But this descent – alas! – did him no
good.

According to Urbahns, the newest form of self-defense of the bourgeois
regime is state capitalism: one need only take a look at the corporate
“planned” state in Italy, Germany and the United States. Accustomed to
broad gestures, Urbahns also throws in here the USSR. We shall speak of
this later. Insofar as the matter touches the capitalist states, Urbahns
concerns himself with a very important phenomenon of our epoch. Monopoly
capitalism has long since outgrown the private ownership of the means of
production and the boundaries of the national state. Paralyzed, however,
by its own organizations, the working class was unable to free in time
the productive forces of society from their capitalist fetters. Hence
arises the protracted epoch of economic and political convulsions. The
productive forces pound against the barriers of private property and of
national boundaries. The bourgeois governments are obliged to pacify the
mutiny of their own productive forces with a police club. This is what
constitutes the so-called planned economy. Insofar as the state attempts
to harness and discipline capitalist anarchy, it may be called
conditionally “state capitalism.”

But we should remember that originally Marxists understood by state
capitalism only the independent economic enterprises of the state
itself. When the reformists dreamed of overcoming capitalism by means of
the municipalization or governmentalization of ever-greater numbers of
transport and industrial enterprises, the Marxists used to reply in
refutation: this is not socialism but state capitalism. Subsequently,
however, this concept acquired a broader meaning and began to apply to
all the varieties of state intervention into the economy; the French use
the word _étatisme_ (statification) in this sense.

But Urbahns not only expounds the travails of “state capitalism” but
appraises them after his own manner. Insofar as it is generally possible
to understand him, he pronounces the regime of “state capitalism” to be
a necessary and, moreover, a progressive stage in the development of
society, in the same sense as trusts are progressive compared with the
disparate enterprises. So fundamental an error in appraising capitalist
planning is enough to bury any approach whatsoever.

While, during the epoch of the capitalist upswing to which the war put
an end, it was possible to view – under certain political preconditions
– the various forms of statification as progressive manifestations, that
is, to consider that state capitalism acts to lead society forward and
facilitates the future economic labor of the proletarian dictatorship,
the present “planned economy” must be viewed as a stage that is
reactionary through and through: state capitalism strives to tear the
economy away from the worldwide division of labor; to adapt the
productive forces to the Procrustean bed of the national state; to
constrict production artificially in some branches and to create just as
artificially other branches by means of enormous unprofitable
expenditures. The economic policies of the present state – beginning
with tariff walls upon the ancient Chinese pattern and ending with the
episodes of forbidding the use of machinery under Hitler’s “planned
economy” – attain an unstable regulation at the cost of causing the
national economy to decline, bringing chaos into world relations and
completely disrupting the monetary system that will be very much needed
for socialist planning. The present state capitalism neither prepares
nor lightens the future work of the socialist state but, on the
contrary, creates for it colossal additional difficulties. The
proletariat let slip a series of opportune periods for the seizure of
power. Through this it has created the conditions for fascist barbarism
in politics and for the destructive work of “state capitalism” in
economics. After the conquest of power, the proletariat will have to pay
economically for its political lapses.

The Economy of the USSR

However, what interests us most within the limits of this analysis is
the fact that Urbahns attempts also to include the economy of the USSR
under the term “state capitalism.” And while so doing he refers – it is
hardly believable! – to Lenin. There is only one possible way of
explaining this reference: as the eternal inventor who creates a new
theory a month, Urbahns has no time to read the books he refers to.
Lenin did actually apply the term “state capitalism” but not to the
Soviet economy as a whole, only to a certain section of it: the foreign
concessions, the mixed industrial and commercial companies and, in part,
the peasant and largely kulak [rich peasant] cooperatives under state
control. All these are indubitable elements of capitalism, but since
they are controlled by the state, and even function as mixed companies
through its direct participation, Lenin conditionally, or, according to
his own expression, “in quotes,” called these economic forms “state
capitalism.” The conditioning of this term depended upon the fact that a
proletarian, and not a bourgeois, state was involved; the quotation
marks were intended to stress just this difference of no little
importance. However, insofar as the proletarian state allowed private
capital and permitted it within definite restrictions to exploit the
workers, it shielded bourgeois relations under one of its wings. In this
strictly limited sense, one could speak of “state capitalism.”

Lenin came out with this very term at the time of the transition to the
NEP, when he presupposed that the concessions and the “mixed companies,”
that is, enterprises based upon the correlation of state and private
capital, would occupy a major position in the Soviet economy alongside
of the pure state trusts and syndicates. In contradistinction to the
state capitalist enterprises – concessions, etc., that is – Lenin
defined the Soviet trusts and syndicates as “enterprises of a
consistently socialist type.” Lenin envisioned the subsequent
development of Soviet economy, of industry in particular, as a
competition between the state capitalist and the pure state enterprises.

We trust that it is clear now within what limits Lenin used this term
that has led Urbahns into temptation. In order to round out the
theoretical catastrophe of the leader of the “Lenin(!)bund,” we must
recall that, contrary to Lenin’s original expectations, neither the
concessions nor the mixed companies played any appreciable role
whatsoever in the development of the Soviet economy. Nothing has now
remained generally of these “state capitalist” enterprises. On the other
hand, the Soviet trusts whose fate appeared so very murky at the dawn of
the NEP underwent a gigantic development in the years after Lenin’s
death. Thus, if one were to use Lenin’s terminology conscientiously and
with some comprehension of the matter, one would have to say that the
Soviet economic development completely bypassed the stage of “state
capitalism” and unfolded along the channel of the enterprises of the
“consistently socialist type.”

Here, however, we must also forestall any possible misunderstandings,
and this time of just the opposite character. Lenin chose his terms with
precision. He called the trusts not _socialist_ enterprises, as the
Stalinists now label them, but enterprises of the “socialist _type_.”
Under Lenin’s pen, this subtle terminological distinction implied that
the trusts will have the right to be called socialist not by type, not
by tendency, that is, but by their genuine content – after the rural
economy will have been revolutionized, after the contradiction between
the city and the village will have been destroyed, after men will have
learned to fully satisfy all human wants, in other words, only in
proportion as a real socialist society would arise on the bases of
nationalized industry and collectivized rural economy. Lenin conceived
that the attainment of this goal would require the successive labors of
two or three generations and, moreover, in indissoluble connection with
the development of the international revolution.

To summarize: under state capitalism, in the strict sense of the word,
we must understand the management of industrial and other enterprises by
the bourgeois state on its own account, or the “regulating” intervention
of the bourgeois state into the workings of private capitalist
enterprises. By state capitalism “in quotes,” Lenin meant the control of
the proletarian state over private capitalist enterprises and relations.
Not one of these definitions applies from any side to the present Soviet
economy. It remains a deep secret what concrete economic content Urbahns
himself puts into his understanding of the Soviet “state capitalism.” To
put it plainly, his newest theory is entirely built around a badly read
quotation.

Bureaucracy and the Ruling Class

There is, however, also another theory concerning the “nonproletarian”
character of the Soviet state, much more ingenious, much more cautious,
but not any more serious. The French Social Democrat Lucien Laurat,
Blum’s colleague and Souvarine’s teacher, has written a booklet
defending the view that the Soviet society, being neither proletarian
nor bourgeois, represents an absolutely new type of class organization,
because the bureaucracy not only rules over the proletariat politically
but also exploits it economically, devouring that surplus value that
hitherto fell to the lot of the bourgeoisie. Laurat invests his
revelations with the weighty formulas of DAS KAPITAL and, in this
manner, gives an appearance of profundity to his superficial and purely
descriptive “sociology.” The compilator is obviously unaware that his
entire theory had been formulated, only with much more fire and
splendor, over thirty years ago by the Russo-Polish revolutionist
Makhaisky, who was superior to his French vulgarizer in that he awaited
neither the October Revolution nor the Stalinist bureaucracy in order to
define “the dictatorship of the proletariat” as a scaffold for the
commanding posts of an exploiting bureaucracy. But even Makhaisky did
not suck his theory out of his thumb; he only “deepened” sociologically
and economically the anarchistic prejudices against state socialism.
Makhaisky, by the way, also utilized Marx’s formulas but in a manner
much more consistent than Laurat’s; according to Makhaisky, the author
of DAS KAPITAL covered up, with malice aforethought, in his formulas of
reproduction (volume II), that portion of surplus value that would be
devoured by the socialist intelligentsia (the bureaucracy).

In our own time, a “theory” of this kind, but without an exposure of
Marx the exploiter, was defended by Myasnikov, who proclaimed that the
dictatorship of the proletariat in the Soviet Union had been supplanted
by the hegemony of a new class: _the social bureaucracy_. In all
probability, Laurat borrowed his theory, directly or indirectly,
precisely from Myasnikov, investing it only with a pedantically
“learned” air. For completeness’ sake, it should also be added that
Laurat has assimilated all the mistakes (and only the mistakes) of Rosa
Luxemburg, among them even those that she herself had renounced.

Let us, however, examine more closely the “theory” itself. The _class_
has an exceptionally important and, moreover, a scientifically
restricted meaning to a Marxist. A class is defined not by its
participation in the distribution of the national income alone, but by
its independent role in the general structure of the economy and by its
independent roots in the economic foundation of society. Each class (the
feudal nobility, the peasantry, the petty bourgeoisie, the capitalist
bourgeoisie and the proletariat) works out its own special forms of
property. The bureaucracy lacks all these social traits. It has no
independent position in the process of production and distribution. It
has no independent property roots. Its functions relate basically to the
political _technique_ of class rule. The existence of a bureaucracy, in
all its variety of forms and differences in specific weight,
characterizes _every_ class regime. Its power is of a reflected
character. The bureaucracy is indissolubly bound up with a ruling
economic class, feeding itself upon the social roots of the latter,
maintaining itself and falling together with it.

Class Exploitation and Social Parasitism

Laurat will say that he “does not object” to the bureaucracy being paid
for its labor insofar as it fulfills the necessary political, economic
and cultural functions; but what is involved is its uncontrolled
appropriation of an absolutely disproportionate part of the national
income; precisely in this sense does it appear as the “exploiting
class.” This argument, based on indubitable facts, does not, however,
change the social physiognomy of the bureaucracy.

Always and in every regime, the bureaucracy devours no small portion of
surplus value. It might not be uninteresting, for example, to compute
what portion of the national income is devoured by the fascist locusts
in Italy or Germany! But this fact, of no small importance by itself, is
entirely insufficient to transform the fascist bureaucracy into an
_independent_ ruling class. It is the hireling of the bourgeoisie. True,
this hireling straddles the boss’s neck, tears from his mouth at times
the juiciest pieces, and spits on his bald spot besides. Say what you
will, a most inconvenient hireling! But, nevertheless, only a hireling.
The bourgeoisie abides him because without him, it and its regime would
absolutely go to the dogs.

_Mutatis mutandis_ [changing what should be changed], what has been said
above can be applied to the Stalinist bureaucracy as well. It devours,
wastes and embezzles a considerable portion of the national income. Its
management costs the proletariat very dearly. In the Soviet society, it
occupies an extremely privileged position not only in the sense of
having political and administrative prerogatives but also in the sense
of possessing enormous material advantages. Still, the biggest
apartments, the juiciest steaks and even Rolls Royces are not enough to
transform the bureaucracy into an independent ruling class.

Inequality, moreover such crying inequality, would, of course, be
absolutely impossible in a socialist society. But contrary to official
and semiofficial lies, the present Soviet regime is not socialist but
transitional. It still bears within it the monstrous heritage of
capitalism, social inequality in particular, not only between the
bureaucracy and the proletariat but also within the bureaucracy itself
and within the proletariat. At the given stage, inequality still
remains, within certain limits, the bourgeois instrument of socialist
progress; differential wages, bonuses, etc., are used as stimuli for
emulation.

While it explains the inequality, the transitional character of the
present system in no way justifies those monstrous, open and secret
privileges that have been arrogated to themselves by the uncontrolled
leaders of the bureaucracy. The Left Opposition did not await the
revelation of Urbahns, Laurat, Souvarine and Simone Weil [3], etc.,
before announcing that the bureaucracy in all its manifestations is
pulling apart the moral tie rods of Soviet society, engendering an acute
and a lawful dissatisfaction among the masses and preparing the ground
for great dangers. Nevertheless, the privileges of the bureaucracy by
themselves do not change the bases of the Soviet society, because the
bureaucracy derives its privileges not from any special property
relations peculiar to it as a “class,” but from those property relations
that have been created by the October Revolution and that are
fundamentally adequate for the dictatorship of the proletariat.

To put it plainly, insofar as the bureaucracy robs the people (and this
is done in various ways by every bureaucracy), we have to deal not with
_class exploitation_, in the scientific sense of the word, but with
_social parasitism_, although on a very large scale. During the Middle
Ages, the clergy constituted a class or an estate, insofar as its rule
depended upon a specific system of land property and forced labor. The
present-day church constitutes not an exploiting class but a parasitic
corporation. It would be silly to actually speak of the American clergy
as a special ruling class; yet, it is indubitable that the priests of
the different colors and denominations devour in the United States a big
portion of the surplus value. In its traits of parasitism, the
bureaucracy, as well as the clergy, is similar to the lumpenproletariat,
which likewise does not represent, as is well known, an independent
“class.”

Two Perspectives

The question will stand out before us in bolder relief if we take it not
in its static but in its dynamic cross section. Squandering
unproductively a tremendous portion of the national income, the Soviet
bureaucracy is interested at the same time, by its very function, in the
economic and cultural growth of the country: the higher the national
income, the more copious its funds of privileges. Concurrently, upon the
social foundations of the Soviet state, the economic and cultural uplift
of the laboring masses must tend to undermine the very bases of
bureaucratic domination. Clearly, in the light of this fortunate
historical variant, the bureaucracy turns out to be only the instrument
– a bad and an expensive instrument – of the socialist state.

But by squandering an ever-bigger portion of the national income and by
disrupting the basic proportions of the economy – it will be said in
refutation – the bureaucracy _retards_ the economic and cultural growth
of the country. Absolutely correct! The further unhindered development
of bureaucratism must lead inevitably to the cessation of economic and
cultural growth, to a terrible social crisis and to the downward plunge
of the entire society. But this would imply not only the collapse of the
proletarian dictatorship but also the end of bureaucratic domination. In
place of the workers’ state would come not “social bureaucratic” but
capitalist relations.

We trust that by thus posing the question in perspective we shall be
able, once for all, to probe thoroughly into the controversy over the
class nature of the USSR; whether we take the variant of further
successes for the Soviet regime or, contrariwise, the variant of its
collapse, the bureaucracy in either case turns out to be not an
independent class but an excrescence upon the proletariat. A tumor can
grow to tremendous size and even strangle the living organism, but a
tumor can never become an independent organism.

Finally, we may add for the sake of complete clarity: if in the USSR
today the Marxist party were in power, it would renovate the entire
political regime; it would shuffle and purge the bureaucracy and place
it under the control of the masses; it would transform all of the
administrative practices and inaugurate a series of capital reforms in
the management of the economy; but in no case would it have to undertake
an _overturn in the property relations, i.e. a new social revolution_.

The Possible Paths of Counterrevolution

The bureaucracy is not a ruling class. But the further development of
the bureaucratic regime can lead to the inception of a new ruling class:
not organically, through degeneration, but through counterrevolution. We
call the Stalinist apparatus _centrist_ precisely because it fulfills a
dual role; _today_, when there is _no longer_ a Marxist leadership, and
none forthcoming _as yet_, it defends the proletarian dictatorship with
its own methods; but these methods are such as facilitate the victory of
the enemy _tomorrow_. Whoever fails to understand this dual role of
Stalinism in the USSR has understood nothing.

The socialist society will live its life without a party, just as it
will live without a state. Under the conditions of the transitional
epoch, the political superstructure plays a _decisive_ role. A developed
and stable dictatorship of the proletariat presupposes that the party
functions in the leading role as a self-acting vanguard, that the
proletariat is welded together by means of trade unions, that the
toilers are indissolubly bound up with the state through the system of
soviets and, finally, that the workers’ state is aligned through the
International into a fighting unit with the world proletariat. In the
meantime, the bureaucracy has strangled the party and the trade unions
and the soviets and the Communist International. There is no need to
explain here what a gigantic portion of the guilt for the degeneration
of the proletarian regime falls upon the international Social Democracy,
which is so splotched with crimes and betrayals – and to which, by the
way, M. Laurat also belongs. [4]

But whatever the actual apportionment of the historical responsibility
may be, the result remains the same; the strangulation of the party, the
soviets and the trade unions implies the political atomization of the
proletariat. Social antagonisms instead of being overcome politically
are suppressed administratively. These collect under pressure to the
same extent that the political resources disappear for solving them
normally. The first social shock, external or internal, may throw the
atomized Soviet society into civil war. The workers, having lost control
over the state and economy, may resort to mass strikes as weapons of
self-defense. The discipline of the dictatorship would be broken. Under
the onslaught of the workers and because of the pressure of economic
difficulties, the trusts would be forced to disrupt the planned
beginnings and enter into competition with one another. The dissolution
of the regime would naturally find its violent and chaotic echo in the
village and would inevitably be thrown over into the army. The socialist
state would collapse, giving place to the capitalist regime or, more
correctly, to capitalist chaos.

The Stalinist press, of course, will reprint our warning analysis as a
counterrevolutionary prophecy, or even as the expressed “desire” of the
Trotskyites. Toward the newspaper hacks of the apparatus, we have long
since had no other feeling save that of silent contempt. In our opinion,
the situation is dangerous but not at all hopeless. In any case, it
would be an act of abysmal cowardice and of direct betrayal to announce
that the greatest revolutionary battle has been lost – before the
battle, and without a battle.

Is It Possible to Remove the Bureaucracy “Peacefully”?

If it is true that the bureaucracy has concentrated all power and all
the avenues to power in its hands – and it is true – then a question
arises of no little importance: how approach the reorganization of the
Soviet state? And, is it possible to solve this task with peaceful
methods?

We must set down, first of all, as an immutable axiom that this task can
be solved only by a revolutionary _party_. The fundamental historic task
is to create the revolutionary party in the USSR from among the healthy
elements of the old party and from among the youth. Later we shall deal
with the conditions under which it can be solved. Let us assume,
however, that such a party is already in existence. Through what ways
could it assume power? As early as 1927 Stalin said, addressing the
Opposition, “The present bureaucracy can be eliminated only through
civil war.” This challenge, Bonapartist in spirit, was addressed not to
the Left Opposition but to the party. Having concentrated all the levers
in its hands, the bureaucracy proclaimed openly that it would not permit
the proletariat to raise its head any longer. The subsequent course of
events has added great weight to this challenge. After the experiences
of the last few years, it would be childish to suppose that the
Stalinist bureaucracy can be removed by means of a party or soviet
congress. In reality, the last congress of the Bolshevik Party took
place at the beginning of 1923, the Twelfth Party Congress. All
subsequent congresses were bureaucratic parades. Today, even such
congresses have been discarded. No normal “constitutional” ways remain
to remove the ruling clique. The bureaucracy can be compelled to yield
power into the hands of the proletarian vanguard only by _force_.

All the hacks will immediately howl in chorus: The “Trotskyites,” like
Kautsky, are preaching an armed insurrection against the dictatorship of
the proletariat. But let us pass on. The question of seizing power will
arise as a practical question for the new party only when it will have
consolidated around itself the majority of the working class. In the
course of such a radical change in the relation of forces, the
bureaucracy would become more and more isolated, more and more split. As
we know, the social roots of the bureaucracy lie in the proletariat, if
not in its active support, then, at any rate, in its “toleration.” When
the proletariat springs into action, the Stalinist apparatus will remain
suspended in midair. Should it still attempt to resist, it will then be
necessary to apply against it not the measures of civil war but rather
the measures of a police character. In any case, what will be involved
is not an armed insurrection against the dictatorship of the proletariat
but the removal of a malignant growth upon it.

A real civil war could develop not between the Stalinist bureaucracy and
the resurgent proletariat but between the proletariat and the active
forces of the counterrevolution. In the event of an open clash between
the two mass camps, there cannot even be talk of the bureaucracy playing
an independent role. Its polar flanks would be flung to the different
sides of the barricade. The fate of the subsequent development would be
determined, of course, by the outcome of the struggle. The victory of
the revolutionary camp, in any case, is conceivable only under the
leadership of a proletarian party, which would naturally be raised to
power by victory over the counterrevolution.

The New Party in the USSR

Which is closer: the danger of the collapse of the Soviet power that has
been sapped by bureaucratism or the hour of the consolidation of the
proletariat around a new party that is capable of saving the October
heritage? There is no a priori answer to such a question; the struggle
will decide. A major historical test – which may be a war – will
determine the relation of forces. It is clear, in any case, that, with
the further decline of the world proletarian movement and the further
extension of the fascist domination, it is not possible to maintain the
Soviet power for any length of time by means of the internal forces
alone. The fundamental condition for the only rock-bottom reform of the
Soviet state is the victorious spread of the _world revolution_.

In the West the revolutionary movement may revive even without a party,
but it can conquer only under the leadership of the party. Throughout
the entire epoch of the social revolution, that is, for a series of
decades, the international revolutionary party has remained the basic
instrument of historical progress. Urbahns, by raising the cry that “old
forms” are outlived and that something “new” is needed – precisely what?
– exposes only the muddle he is in ... in rather old forms. Trade-union
work, under the conditions of “planned” capitalism, and the struggle
against fascism and the impending war, will indubitably result in
producing new methods and types of fighting organizations. Only, instead
of indulging like the Brandlerites in fantasies upon the illegal trade
unions, one must study attentively the actual course of the struggle,
seizing upon the initiative of the workers themselves, extending and
generalizing it. But, first and foremost, a party, i.e., a politically
welded core of the proletarian vanguard, is required to accomplish this
work. Urbahns’ position is subjective: he became disillusioned in the
party, after he had successfully wrecked his own “party” on the rocks.

Among the innovators, a few proclaim, we said “long ago” that new
parties are needed; now, at last, the “Trotskyites” have also come
around to it; in time, they will also understand that the Soviet Union
is not a workers’ state. Instead of studying the actual historic
process, these people are busy making astronomical “discoveries.” As
early as 1921, Gorter’s sect and the German “Communist Workers Party”
decided that the Comintern was doomed. Since then, there has been no
lack of such announcements (Loriot, Korsch, Souvarine and so forth).
However, absolutely nothing came out of these “diagnoses” because they
reflected only the subjective disillusion of circles and personalities
and not the objective demands of the historical process. It is precisely
for this reason that the loud innovators remain on the sidelines right
now. [5]

The course of events follows no prearranged route. The Comintern ruined
itself by its capitulation before fascism in the eyes of the masses, and
not of individuals. But even after the collapse of the Comintern, the
Soviet state still exists, true, with its revolutionary authority
greatly reduced. One must take the facts as they are given by the actual
development and not become capricious and purse one’s lips, like Simone
Weil; one must not take offense at history nor turn one’s back to it.

To build the new parties and the new International, first of all,
reliable, principled bases are required and those that stand upon the
level of our epoch. We have no illusions concerning the deficiencies and
lapses in the theoretical inventory of the Bolshevik-Leninists. However,
their ten-years’ work has prepared the fundamental _theoretical and
strategic prerequisites for the building of the new International._ Hand
in hand with our new allies, we will develop these prerequisites and
concretize them upon the basis of criticism in the actual course of the
struggle.

The Fourth International and the USSR

In the USSR, the core of the new party – in reality, the Bolshevik Party
revived under new conditions – will be the group of Bolshevik-Leninists.
Even the official Soviet press during the last few months has testified
that our adherents have been carrying on their work courageously and not
unsuccessfully. But illusions would be out of place here; the party of
revolutionary internationalism will be able to free the workers from the
decomposing influence of the national bureaucracy only in the event that
the international proletarian vanguard will once again appear as a
fighting force on the world arena.

From the beginning of the imperialist war, and in developed form since
the October Revolution, the Bolshevik Party played the leading role in
the world revolutionary struggle. Today this position has been
completely lost. This applies not just to the official caricature of a
party. The extremely difficult conditions under which the Russian
Bolshevik-Leninists work exclude them from the possibility of playing
the leading role on the international scale. More than this, the Left
Opposition group in the USSR can develop into a new party only as a
result of the successful formation and growth of the new International.
The revolutionary center of gravity has shifted definitely to the West,
where the immediate possibilities of building parties are immeasurably
greater.

Under the influence of the tragic experiences of recent years, a great
number of revolutionary elements within the proletariat of all countries
have gathered who await a clear call and an unspotted banner. True, the
convulsions of the Comintern have almost everywhere impelled new strata
of workers towards the Social Democracy. But precisely this influx of
alarmed masses becomes a mortal danger for reformism; it is ripping at
the seams, disintegrating into factions, and everywhere extruding a
revolutionary wing. Such are the immediate political preconditions for
the new International. The cornerstone has been laid already: it is the
declaration of principles by the four organizations.

The condition for further successes is the correct evaluation of the
world situation, including the class nature of the Soviet Union. Along
this line, the new International will be subjected to tests from the
very first days of its existence. Before it will be able to reform the
Soviet state, it must take upon itself its defense.

Every political tendency that waves its hand hopelessly at the Soviet
Union, under the pretext of its “non-proletarian” character, runs the
risk of becoming the passive instrument of imperialism. And from our
standpoint, of course, the tragic possibility is not excluded that the
first workers’ state, weakened by its bureaucracy, will fall under the
joint blows of its internal and external enemies. But in the event of
this worst possible variant, a tremendous significance for the
subsequent course of the revolutionary struggle will be borne by the
question: _where_ are those guilty for the catastrophe? Not the
slightest taint of guilt must fall upon the revolutionary
internationalists. In the hour of mortal danger, they must remain on the
last barricade.

Today the rupture of the bureaucratic equilibrium in the USSR would
almost surely serve in favor of the counterrevolutionary forces.
However, given a genuine revolutionary International, the inevitable
crisis of the Stalinist regime would open the possibility of revival in
the USSR. This is our basic course.

Every day the foreign policies of the Kremlin deal new blows to the
world proletariat. Adrift from the masses, the diplomatic functionaries
under the leadership of Stalin trample over the most elementary
revolutionary feelings of the workers of all countries, first of all, to
the greatest detriment of the Soviet Union itself. But in this, there is
nothing unexpected. The foreign policies of the bureaucracy supplement
the domestic. We fight as much against the one as the other. But we wage
our struggle from the standpoint of defending the workers’ state.

The functionaries of the decomposing Comintern, in different countries,
continue to swear their loyalty to the Soviet Union. It would be an act
of inexcusable stupidity to build anything upon these oaths. For the
majority of these people, the noisy “defense” of the USSR is not a
conviction but a profession. They do not fight for the dictatorship of
the proletariat; they mop up the tracks of the Stalinist bureaucracy
(see, for example, L’HUMANITÉ). In the hour of crisis, the Barbussized
Comintern will be capable of offering no greater support to the Soviet
Union than the opposition it had offered to Hitler. But it is otherwise
with the revolutionary internationalists. Ingloriously hounded for a
decade by the bureaucracy, they indefatigably call the workers to the
defense of the Soviet Union.

On that day when the new International will demonstrate to the Russian
workers not in words but in action that it, and it alone, stands for the
defense of the workers’ state, the position of the Bolshevik-Leninists
inside the Soviet Union will change within twenty-four hours. The new
International will offer the Stalinist bureaucracy a united front
against the common foe. And if our International represents a force, the
bureaucracy will be unable to evade the united front in the moment of
danger. What then will remain of the many years’ encrustation of lies
and slander?

Even in the event of war, the united front with the Stalinist
bureaucracy will not imply a “holy alliance” after the manner of
bourgeois and Social Democratic parties who during the time of an
imperialist brawl suspend mutual criticism in order to better dupe the
people thereby. No, even in the event of war, we will maintain a
critical irreconcilability toward bureaucratic centrism, which will not
be able to cover up its incapacity to lead a genuine revolutionary war.

The problem of the world revolution as well as the problem of the Soviet
Union may summed up in one and the same brief formula: _The Fourth
International_.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

1. Sage American Brandlerites (the Lovestone group) complicate the
question; the economic policy of Stalinists, if you please, is
impeccable, but the political regime in the USSR is bad – there is no
democracy. It does not occur to these theoreticians to ask themselves
why then does Stalin liquidate democracy if his economic policies are
correct and successful? Isn’t it out of fear that if proletarian
democracy existed, the party and the working class would express much
too restlessly and violently their enthusiasm over his economic
policies?

2. Those who are interested, if there are such, may themselves become
acquainted with the “platform” of “communist (!) democrats.” From the
viewpoint of the fundamentals of Marxism, it is difficult to conceive of
a more charlatanistic document.

3. Having fallen into despair over the “unsuccessful” experiments of the
dictatorship of the proletariat, Simone Weil has found solace in a new
vocation: the defense of her personality against society. The hoary
formula of liberalism, vivified with cheap anarchistic exaltation! And
think of it – Simone Weil speaks loftily about our “illusions.” She and
those like her require many years of stubborn perseverance in order to
free themselves from the most reactionary, lower-middle-class
prejudices. Appropriately enough her new views have found a haven in an
organ that bears the obviously ironic name, LA RÉVOLUTION PROLÉTARIENNE
[THE PROLETARIAN REVOLUTION]. This Louzon publication is ideally suited
for revolutionary melancholics and political rentiers living on the
dividends from their capital of recollections and pretentious
philosophizers who will perhaps adhere to the revolution ... after it
will have been achieved.

4. This prophet accuses the Russian Bolshevik-Leninists of lacking
revolutionary decisiveness. Confusing, in the Austro-Marxist style,
revolution with counter-revolution, and the return to bourgeois
democracy with the preservation of the proletarian dictatorship, Laurat
lectures Rakovsky upon revolutionary struggles. This same gentleman in
passing adjudges Lenin to be a “mediocre theoretician.” Small wonder!
Lenin who formulated in the simplest manner the most complex theoretical
conclusions cannot overawe the pretentious philistine who endows his
thin and flat generalizations with a cabalistic air.

Layout for a visiting card: “Lucien Laurat: by avocation, a reserve
theoretician and strategist of the proletarian revolution ... for
Russia; by profession, assistant to Leon Blum.”

The inscription is somewhat long but correct. It is said that this
“theoretician” has adherents among the youth. Poor youth!

5. By its very nature what has been said above cannot apply to those
organizations that have comparatively recently split away from the
Social Democracy or that, generally, had their own particular type of
development (like the Revolutionary Socialist Party of Holland) and that
naturally refused to link their fate with the fate of the Comintern in
the period of its decay. The best of these organizations are now placing
themselves under the banner of the new International. Others will follow
them tomorrow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[return] 

Last updated on: 8 June 2009

Save
