
V. I.   Lenin

The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats^([4])

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Written: Written in exile at the end of 1897
 Published: First published in pamphlet form in Geneva, 1898. Published
according to the text of the 1902 edition checked with copy of the
manuscript, the 1898 and 1905 editions, and the text in the miscellany
_Twelve Years_ by Vl. Ilyin, 1907.
Source: _Lenin Collected Works_, Progress Publishers, ..., Moscow,
Volume 2, pages 323-352.
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription\Markup: D. Walters
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2001). You may freely copy,
distribute, display and perform this work; as well as make derivative
and commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your
source.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

[___]

The second half of the nineties witnessed a remarkable increase in the
work being done on the presentation and solution of the problems of the
Russian revolution. The appearance of a new revolutionary party,
Narodnoye Pravo,^([5]) the growing influence and successes of the Social
Democrats, the evolution within Narodnaya Volya^([6])—all this has
evoked a lively discussion on questions of programme both in study
circles of socialist intellectuals and workers and in illegal
literature. Regarding the latter sphere, reference should be made to “An
Urgent Question” and the “Manifesto” (1894) of the Narodnoye Pravo
Party, to the _Leaflet of the Narodnaya Volya Group_, to _Rabotnik_
published abroad by the League of Russian Social-Democrats,^([7]) to the
increasing output of revolutionary pamphlets in Russia, mainly for
workers, and the agitation conducted by the Social-Democratic League of
Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class in St. Petersburg
around the important strikes there in 1896, etc.

Atthe present time (the end of 1897), the most urgent question, in our
opinion, is that of the _practical_ activities of the Social-Democrats.
We emphasise the _practical_ side of Social-Democracy, because on the
theoretical side the most critical period—the period of stubborn refusal
by its opponents to understand it, of strenuous efforts to suppress the
new trend the moment it arose, on the one hand, and of stalwart defence
of the fundamentals of Social-Democracy, on the other—is now apparently
behind us. Now the _main and basic features_ of the theoretical views of
the Social-Democrats   have been sufficiently clarified. The same cannot
be said about the _practical_ side of Social-Democracy, about its
political _programme_, its methods, its tactics. It is in this sphere,
we think, that misapprehension and mutual misunderstanding mostly
prevail, preventing a complete rapprochement between Social-Democracy
and those revolutionaries who in theory have completely renounced the
principles of the Narodnaya Volya and in practice are either led by the
very force of circumstances to carry on propaganda and agitation among
the workers—nay, more: to conduct their activities among the workers on
the basis of the _class struggle_—or else strive to base their whole
programme and revolutionary activities on _democratic_ tasks. If we are
not mistaken, the latter description fits the two revolutionary groups
which are operating in Russia at the present time, parallel to the
Social-Democrats, namely, the Narodnaya Volya and Narodnoye Pravo.

We,therefore, think it particularly opportune to try to explain the
_practical_ tasks of the Social-Democrats and to state the grounds on
which we consider their programme to be the most rational of the three
now existing and the arguments advanced against it to be based very
largely on misunderstanding.

Theobject of the practical activities of the Social-Democrats is, as is
well known, to lead the class struggle of the proletariat and to
organise that struggle in both its manifestations: socialist (the fight
against the capitalist class aimed at destroying the class system and
organising socialist society), and democratic (the fight against
absolutism aimed at winning political liberty in Russia and
democratising the political and social system of Russia). We said _as is
well known_. And indeed, from the very moment they appeared as a
separate social-revolutionary trend, the Russian Social-Democrats have
always quite definitely indicated this object of their activities, have
always emphasised the dual manifestation and content of the class
struggle of the proletariat and have always insisted on the inseparable
connection between their socialist and democratic tasks—a connection
clearly expressed in the name they have adopted. Nevertheless, to this
day you often meet socialists who have the most distorted notions about
the Social-Democrats   and accuse them of ignoring the political
struggle, etc. Let us, therefore, dwell a little on a description of
both aspects of the practical activities of Russian Social-Democracy.

Letus begin with socialist activity. One would have thought that the
character of Social-Democratic activity in this respect had become quite
clear since the Social-Democratic League of Struggle for the
Emancipation of the Working Class in St. Petersburg began its activities
among the St. Petersburg workers. The socialist activities of Russian
Social-Democrats consist in spreading _by propaganda_ the teachings of
scientific socialism, in spreading among the workers a proper
understanding of the present social and economic system, its basis and
its development, an understanding of the various _classes_ in Russian
society, of their interrelations, of the struggle between these classes,
of the role of the working class in this struggle, of its attitude to
wards the declining and the developing classes, towards the past and the
future of capitalism, an understanding of the historical task of
international Social-Democracy and of the Russian working class.
Inseparably connected with propaganda is _agitation_ among the workers,
which naturally comes to the forefront in the present political
conditions of Russia and at the present level of development of the
masses of workers. Agitation among the workers means that the
Social-Democrats take part in all the spontaneous manifestations of the
working-class struggle, in all the conflicts between the workers and the
capitalists over the working day, wages, working conditions, etc., etc.
Our task is to merge our activities with the practical, everyday
questions of working-class life, to help the workers understand these
questions, to draw the workers’ attention to the most important abuses,
to help them formulate their demands to the employers more precisely and
practically, to develop among the workers consciousness of their
solidarity, consciousness of the common interests and common cause of
all the Russian workers as a united working class that is part of the
international army of the proletariat. To organise study circles among
workers, to establish proper and secret connections between them and the
central group of Social-Democrats, to publish and distribute
working-class literature, to organise the receipt of correspondence from
all   centres of the working-class movement, to publish agitational
leaflets and manifestos and to distribute them, and to train a body of
experienced agitators—such, in broad outline, are the manifestations of
the socialist activities of Russian Social-Democracy.

Ourwork is primarily and mainly directed to the factory, urban workers.
Russian Social-Democracy must not dissipate its forces; it must
concentrate its activities on the industrial proletariat, who are most
susceptible to Social-Democratic ideas, most developed intellectually
and politically, and most important by virtue of their numbers and
concentration in the country’s large political centres. The creation of
a durable revolutionary organisation among the factory, urban workers is
therefore the first and most urgent task confronting Social-Democracy,
one from which it would be highly unwise to let ourselves be diverted at
the present time. But, while recognising the necessity of concentrating
our forces on the factory workers and opposing the dissipation of our
forces, we do not in the least wish to suggest that the Russian
Social-Democrats should ignore other strata of the Russian proletariat
and working class. Nothing of the kind. The very conditions of life of
the Russian factory workers very often compel them to enter into the
closest relations with the handicraftsmen, the industrial proletariat
scattered outside the factory in towns and villages, and whose
conditions are infinitely worse. The Russian factory worker also comes
into direct contact with the rural population (very often the factory
worker’s family live in the country) and, consequently, he cannot but
come into close contact with the rural proletariat, with the many
millions of regular farm workers and day labourers, and also with those
ruined peasants who, while clinging to their miserable plots of land,
have to work off their debts and take on all sorts of “casual jobs,”
i.e., are also wage-labourers. The Russian Social-Democrats think it
inopportune _to send_ their forces among. the handicraftsmen and rural
labourers, but they do not in the least intend to ignore them; they will
try to enlighten the advanced workers also on questions affecting the
lives of the handicraftsmen and rural labourers, so that when these
workers come into contact with the more backward strata of the
proletariat, they will imbue them with the   ideas of the class
struggle, socialism and the political tasks of Russian democracy in
general and of the Russian proletariat in particular. It is impractical
to send agitators among the handicraftsmen and rural labourers when
there is still so much work to be done among the factory, urban workers,
but in numerous cases the socialist worker comes willy-nilly into
contact with these people and must be able to take advantage of these
opportunities and understand the general tasks of Social-Democracy in
Russia. Hence, those who accuse the Russian Social-Democrats of being
narrow-minded, of trying to ignore the mass of the labouring population
for the sake of the factory workers, are profoundly mistaken. On the
contrary, agitation among the advanced sections of the proletariat is
the surest and the only way to rouse (as the movement expands) the
entire Russian proletariat. The dissemination of socialism and of the
idea of the class struggle among the urban workers will inevitably cause
these ideas to flow in the smaller and more scattered channels. This
requires that these ideas take deeper root among the better prepared
elements and spread throughout the vanguard of the Russian working-class
movement and of the Russian revolution. While concentrating all its
forces on activity among the factory workers, Russian Social-Democracy
is ready to support those Russian revolutionaries who, in practice, come
to base their socialist activities on the class struggle of the
proletariat; but it does not in the least conceal the point that no
practical alliances with other groups of revolutionaries can, or should,
lead to compromises or concessions on matters of theory, programme or
banner. Convinced that the doctrine of scientific socialism and the
class struggle is the only revolutionary theory that can today serve as
the banner of the revolutionary movement, the Russian Social-Democrats
will exert every effort to spread this doctrine, to guard it against
false interpretation and to combat every attempt to impose vaguer
doctrines on the still young working-class movement in Russia.
Theoretical reasoning proves and the practical activities of the
Social-Democrats show that all _socialists_ in Russia should become
_Social-Democrats_.

Letus now deal with the _democratic_ tasks and with the democratic work
of the Social-Democrats. Let us repeat,   once again, that this work is
_inseparably_ connected with socialist activity. In conducting
_propaganda_ among the workers, the Social-Democrats _cannot_ avoid
political problems, and they would regard any attempt to avoid them, or
even to push them aside, as a profound mistake and a departure from the
basic principles of international Social-Democracy. Simultaneously with
the dissemination of scientific socialism, Russian Social-Democrats set
themselves the task of propagating _democratic ideas_ among the working
class masses; they strive to spread an understanding of absolutism in
all its manifestations, of its class content, of the necessity to
overthrow it, of the impossibility of waging a successful struggle for
the workers’ cause without achieving political liberty and the
democratisation of Russia’s political and social system. In conducting
_agitation_ among the workers on their immediate _economic_ demands, the
Social-Democrats inseparably link this with agitation on the immediate
political needs, the distress and the demands of the working class,
agitation against police tyranny, manifested in every strike, in every
conflict between workers and capitalists, agitation against the
restriction of the rights of the workers as Russian citizens in general
and as the class suffering the worst oppression and having the least
rights in particular, agitation against every prominent representative
and flunkey of absolutism who comes into direct contact with the workers
and who clearly reveals to the working class its condition of political
slavery. Just as there is no issue affecting the life of the workers in
the economic field that must be left unused for the purpose of economic
agitation, so there is no issue in the political field that does not
serve as a subject for political agitation. These two kinds of agitation
are inseparably connected in the activities of the Social-Democrats as
the two sides of the same medal. Both economic and political agitation
are equally necessary to develop the class-consciousness of the
proletariat; both economic and political agitation are equally necessary
for guiding the class struggle of the Russian workers, because every
class struggle is a political struggle. By arousing the
class-consciousness of the workers, by organising, disciplining and
training them for united action and for the fight for the ideals of
Social-Democracy, both  kinds of agitation will enable the workers to
test their strength on immediate issues and immediate needs, to wring
partial concessions from their enemy and thus improve their economic
conditions, compel the capitalists to reckon with the strength of the
organised workers, compel the government to extend the workers’ rights,
to pay heed to their demands and keep the government in constant fear of
the hostility of the masses of workers led by a strong Social-Democratic
organisation.

Wehave pointed to the inseparably close connection between _socialist_
and _democratic_ propaganda and agitation, to the complete parallelism
of revolutionary activity in both spheres. Nevertheless, there is a big
difference between these two types of activity and struggle. The
difference is that in the economic struggle the proletariat stands
absolutely alone against both the landed nobility and the bourgeoisie,
except, perhaps, for the help it receives (and by no means always) from
those elements of the petty bourgeoisie which gravitate towards the
proletariat. In the democratic, _political_ struggle, however, the
Russian working class does not stand alone; at its side are all the
political opposition elements, strata and classes, since they are
hostile to absolutism and are fighting it in one form or another. Here
_side by side_ with the proletariat stand the opposition elements of the
bourgeoisie, or of the educated classes, or of the petty bourgeoisie, or
of the nationalities, religions and sects, etc., etc., persecuted by the
autocratic government. The question naturally arises of what the
attitude of the working class towards these elements should be. Further,
should it not combine with them in the common struggle against the
autocracy? After all, all Social-Democrats admit that the political
revolution in Russia must precede the socialist revolution; should they
not, therefore, combine with all the elements in the political
opposition to fight the autocracy, setting socialism aside for the time
being? Is not this essential in order to strengthen the fight against
the autocracy?

Letus examine these two questions.

Theattitude of the working class, as a fighter against the autocracy,
towards all the other social classes and groups in the political
opposition is very precisely determined by   the basic principles of
Social-Democracy expounded in the famous _Communist Manifesto_. The
Social-Democrats support the progressive social classes against the
reactionary classes, the bourgeoisie against the representatives of
privileged landowning estate and the bureaucracy, the big bourgeoisie
against the reactionary strivings of the petty bourgeoisie. This support
does not presuppose, nor does it call for, any compromise with
non-Social-Democratic programmes and principles—it is support given to
an ally against a _particular_ enemy. Moreover, the Social-Democrats
render this support in order to expedite the fall of the common enemy,
but expect nothing _for themselves_ from these temporary allies, and
concede nothing to them. The Social-Democrats support every
revolutionary movement against the present social system, they support
all oppressed nationalities, persecuted religions, downtrodden social
estates, etc., in their fight for equal rights.

_Support_for all elements of the political opposition will be expressed
in the propaganda of the Social-Democrats by the fact that, in showing
that the autocracy is hostile to the workers’ cause, they will also
point to its hostility towards various other social groups; they will
point to the solidarity of the working class with these groups on _a
particular issue_, _in a particular task_, etc. In agitation, this
support will be expressed by the Social-Democrats’ taking advantage of
every manifestation of the police tyranny of the autocracy to point out
to the workers how this tyranny affects all Russian citizens _in
general_, and the representatives of the exceptionally oppressed social
estates, nationalities, religions, sects, etc., in particular; and how
that tyranny affects _the working class_ especially. Finally, in
practice, this support is expressed in the readiness of the Russian
Social-Democrats to enter into alliances with revolutionaries of other
trends for the purpose of achieving certain particular aims, and this
readiness has been shown in practice on more than one occasion.

Thisbrings us to the second question. While pointing to the solidarity
of one or other of the various opposition groups with the workers, the
Social-Democrats will always single out the workers from the rest, they
will always point out that this solidarity is temporary and conditional,
they will   always emphasise the independent class identity of the
proletariat, who tomorrow may find themselves in opposition to their
allies of today. We shall be told that “such action will _weaken_ all
the fighters for political liberty at the present time.” We shall reply
that such action will _strengthen_ all the fighters for political
liberty. Only those fighters are strong who rely on the _consciously
recognised_ real interests of certain classes, and any attempt to
obscure these class interests, which already play a predominant role in
contemporary society, will only weaken the fighters. That is the first
point. The second point is that, in the fight against the autocracy, the
working class must single itself out, for it is the _only_ thoroughly
consistent and unreserved enemy of the autocracy, _only_ between the
working class and the autocracy is no compromise possible, _only_ in the
working class can democracy find a champion who makes no reservations,
is not irresolute and does not look back. The hostility of all other
classes, groups and strata of the population towards the autocracy is
_not unqualified_; their democracy always looks back. The bourgeoisie
cannot but realise that industrial and social development is being
retarded by the autocracy, but it fears the complete democratisation of
the political and social system and can at any moment enter into
alliance with the autocracy against the proletariat. The petty
bourgeoisie is two-faced by its very nature, and while it gravitates, on
the one hand, towards the proletariat and democracy, on the other, it
gravitates towards the reactionary classes, tries to hold up the march
of history, is apt to be seduced by the experiments and blandishments of
the autocracy (for example, the “people’s policy”[8] of Alexander III),
is capable of concluding an alliance with the ruling classes against the
proletariat _for the sake of_ strengthening its own _small-proprietor_
position. Educated people, and the “intelligentsia” generally, cannot
but revolt against the savage police tyranny of the autocracy, which
hunts down thought and knowledge; but the material interests of this
intelligentsia bind it to the autocracy and to the bourgeoisie, compel
it to be inconsistent, to compromise, to sell its oppositional and
revolutionary ardour for an official salary, or a share of profits or
dividends. As for the democratic elements among the oppressed
nationalities and   the persecuted religions, everybody knows and sees
that the class antagonisms within these categories of the population are
much deeper-going and stronger than the solidarity binding all classes
within any one category against the autocracy and in favour of
democratic institutions. The proletariat alone can be—and because of its
class position must be—a consistently democratic, determined enemy of
absolutism, incapable of making any concessions or compromises. The
proletariat alone can be the _vanguard fighter_ for political liberty
and for democratic institutions. Firstly, this is because political
tyranny bears most heavily upon the proletariat whose position gives it
no opportunity to secure a modification of that tyranny—it has no access
to the higher authorities, not even to the officials, and it has no
influence on public opinion. Secondly, the proletariat alone is capable
of bringing about the _complete_ democratisation of the political and
social system, since this would place the system in the hands of the
workers. That is why the _merging_ of the democratic activities of the
working class with the democratic aspirations of other classes and
groups would _weaken_ the democratic movement, would _weaken_ the
political struggle, would make it less determined, less consistent, more
likely to compromise On the other hand, if the working class _stands
out_ as the vanguard fighter for democratic institutions, this will
_strength_ the democratic movement, will _strengthen_ the struggle for
political liberty, because the working class will _spur on_ all the
other democratic and political opposition elements, will push the
liberals towards the political radicals, will push the radicals towards
an irrevocable rupture with the whole of the political and social
structure of present society. We said above that all _socialists_ in
Russia should become _Social-Democrats_. We now add: all true and
consistent _democrats_ in Russia should become _Social-Democrats._

Wewill illustrate what we mean by quoting the following example. Take
the civil service, the bureaucracy, as representing a special category
of persons who specialise in the work of administration and occupy a
privileged position as compared with the people. We see this institution
everywhere, from autocratic and semi-Asiatic Russia to cultured. free
and civilised England, as an essential organ of   bourgeois society. The
_complete lack of rights_ of the people in relation to government
officials and the _complete_ absence of control over the privileged
bureaucracy correspond to the backwardness of Russia and to its
absolutism In England powerful popular control is exercised over the
administration, but even there that control _is far from being
complete_, even there the bureaucracy retains not a few of its
privileges, and not infrequently is the master and not the servant of
the people. Even in England we see that powerful social groups support
the privileged position of the bureaucracy and hinder the complete
democratisation of that institution. Why? Because it is in the interests
of the proletariat alone to democratise it _completely_ ; the most
progressive strata of the bourgeoisie defend certain prerogatives of the
bureaucracy and are opposed to the election of all officials, opposed to
the complete abolition of electoral qualifications, opposed to making
officials directly responsible to the people, etc., because these strata
realise that the proletariat will take advantage of such complete
democratisation in order to use it _against_ the bourgeoisie. This is
the case in Russia, too. Many and most diverse strata of the Russian
people are opposed to the omnipotent, irresponsible, corrupt, savage,
ignorant and parasitic Russian bureaucracy. But except for the
proletariat, _not one_ of these strata would agree to the complete
democratisation of the bureaucracy, because all these strata
(bourgeoisie, petty bourgeoisie, the “intelligentsia” in general) have
some ties with the bureaucracy, because all these strata are _kith and
kin_ of the Russian bureaucracy. Who does not know how easy it is in
Holy Russia for a radical intellectual, or socialist intellectual, to
turn into an official of The Imperial Government, an official who takes
comfort from the thought that he does “good” with in the limits of
office routine, an official who pleads this “good” in justification of
his political indifference, his servility towards the government of the
knout and the whip? _The proletariat_ alone is unreservedly hostile to
the autocracy and the Russian bureaucracy, _the proletariat_ alone has
no ties with these organs of aristocratic bourgeois society and the
proletariat alone is capable of irreconcilable hostility towards them
and of waging a determined struggle against them.

Whenwe show that the proletariat, led in its class struggle by
Social-Democracy, is the vanguard fighter of Russian democracy, we
encounter the very widespread and very strange opinion that Russian
Social-Democracy relegates political tasks and political struggle to the
background. As we see, this opinion is the very opposite of the truth.
How are we to explain this astonishing failure to understand the
principles of Social-Democracy that have often been expounded and were
expounded in the very first Russian Social-Democratic publications, in
the pamphlets and books published abroad by the Emancipation of Labour
group?^([9]) In our view, the explanation of this amazing fact lies in
the following three circumstances.

First,it lies in the general failure of the representatives of old
revolutionary theories to understand the principles of Social-Democracy,
accustomed as they are to base their programmes and plans of activity on
abstract ideas and not on an exact appraisal of the actual classes
operating in the country, classes that have been placed in certain
relationships by history. This lack of realistic discussion of the
_interests_ which support Russian democracy can only give rise to the
opinion that Russian Social-Democracy leaves the democratic tasks of
Russian revolutionaries in the background.

Second,it lies in the failure to understand that when economic and
political issues, and socialist and democratic activities, are united
into one whole, into the single _class struggle of the proletariat_,
this does not weaken but strengthens the democratic movement and the
political struggle, by bringing it closer to the real interests of the
mass of the people, dragging political issues out of the “stuffy studies
of the intelligentsia” into the street, into the midst of the workers
and labouring classes, and replacing abstract ideas by real
manifestations of political oppression from which the greatest sufferers
are the proletariat, and on the basis of which the Social-Democrats
conduct their agitation. It often seems to the Russian radical that
instead of frankly and directly calling upon the advanced workers to
join the political struggle, the Social-Democrat points to the task of
developing the working-class movement, of organising the class struggle
of the proletariat, and thereby _retreats_ from his democracy, relegates
the political struggle   to the background. But if this is _retreat_, it
is the kind of retreat that is meant in the French proverb: “_Il faut
reculer pour mieux sauter_ !” (Step back in order to leap farther
forward.)

Third,the misunderstanding arises from the fact that the very term
“political struggle” means something different to the Narodovoltsi and
Narodopravtsi, on the one hand, and to the Social-Democrats, on the
other. The Social-Democrats understand the political struggle
differently, they understand it _much more broadly_ than do the
representatives of the old revolutionary theories. A clear illustration
of this seeming paradox is provided by the _Leaflet of the Narodnaya
Volya Group_, No. 4, December 9, 1895. While heartily welcoming this
publication, which testifies to the profound and fruitful thinking that
is going on among the present-day Narodovoltsi, we cannot refrain from
mentioning P. L. Lavrov’s article, “Programme questions” (pp. 19-22),
which vividly reveals the different conception of the political struggle
entertained by the old-style Narodovoltsi.^([1]) “... Here,” writes P.
L. Lavrov, speaking of the relation of the Narodnaya Volya programme to
the Social-Democratic programme, “one thing and one thing alone is
material, viz., is it possible to organise a strong workers’ party under
the autocracy and to do so apart from the organisation of a
revolutionary party directed against the autocracy?” (p. 21, col. 2);
also a little before that (in col. 1): “. . . to organise a Russian
workers’ party while autocracy reigns without at the same time
organising a revolutionary party against this autocracy.” We cannot at
all understand these distinctions which seem to be of such cardinal
importance to P. L. Lavrov. What is the meaning of “a workers’ party
_apart from_ a revolutionary party against the autocracy”??   Is not a
workers’ party itself a revolutionary party? Is it not directed against
the autocracy? This queer idea is explained in the following passage in
P. L. Lavrov’s article: “A Russian workers’ party will have to be
organised under the rule of the autocracy with all its charms. If the
Social-Democrats succeeded in doing this without at the same time
organising a political _conspiracy_[2] against the autocracy, with all
that goes with such a _conspiracy_,^([3]) then, of course, their
political programme would be a fit and proper programme for Russian
socialists, since the emancipation of the workers by the efforts of the
workers themselves would be accomplished. But this is very doubtful, if
not impossible” (p. 21, col. 1). So that’s the point! To the
Narodovoltsi, the term political struggle is synonymous with the term
political _conspiracy_ ! It must be confessed that in these words P. L.
Lavrov has managed to bring out in bold relief the fundamental
difference between the tactics in the political struggle adopted by the
Narodovoltsi and by the Social-Democrats. Blanquist,^([10])
conspiratorial traditions are fearfully strong among the former, so much
so that they cannot conceive of political struggle except in the form of
political conspiracy. The Social-Democrats, however, are not guilty of
such a narrow outlook; they do not believe in conspiracies; they think
that the period of conspiracies has long passed away, that to reduce
political struggle to conspiracy means, on the one hand, immensely
restricting its scope, and, on the other hand, choosing the most
unsuitable methods of struggle. Everyone will understand that P. L.
Lavrov’s remark that “the Russian Social-Democrats take the activities
of the West as an unfailing model” (p. 21, col. 1) is nothing more than
a polemical manoeuvre, and that actually the Russian Social-Democrats
have never forgotten the political conditions here, they have never
dreamed of being able to form a workers’ party in Russia legally, they
have never separated the task of fighting for socialism from that of
fighting for political liberty. But they have always thought, and
continue to think, that this fight must be waged not by conspirators,
but by a revolutionary party based on the working-class   movement. They
think that the fight against the autocracy must consist not in
organising conspiracies, but in educating, disciplining and organising
the proletariat, in political agitation among the workers which
denounces every manifestation of absolutism, which pillories all the
knights of the police government and compels this government to make
concessions. Is this not precisely the kind of activity being conducted
by the St. Petersburg League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the
Working Class? Does not this organisation represent the embryo of a
revolutionary party based on the working-class movement, which leads the
class struggle of the proletariat against capital and against the
autocratic government without hatching any conspiracies, while deriving
its strength from the _combination_ of socialist and democratic struggle
into the single, indivisible class struggle of the St. Petersburg
proletariat? Brief as they may have been, have not the activities of the
League already shown that the proletariat, led by Social-Democracy, is a
big political force with which the government is already compelled to
reckon, and to which it hastens to make concessions? Both the haste with
which the law of June 2, 1897, was passed, and the content of that law
clearly reveal its significance as a concession wrung by the
proletariat, as a position won from the enemy of the Russian people.
This concession is a very tiny one, the position won is very small, but
the working-class organisation that has succeeded in forcing this
concession is also not distinguished for breadth, stability, long
standing or wealth of experience or resources. As is well known, the
League of Struggle was formed only in 1895-96, and its appeals to the
workers have been confined to hectographed or lithographed leaflets. Can
it he denied that an organisation like this, if it united, at least, the
biggest centres of the working-class movement in Russia (the St.
Petersburg, Moscow-Vladimir, and the southern areas, and also the most
important towns like Odessa, Kiev, Saratov, etc.), if it had a
revolutionary organ at its disposal and enjoyed as much prestige among
the Russian workers generally as the League of Struggle does among the
St. Petersburg workers—can it be denied that such an organisation would
be a tremendous political factor in contemporary Russia, a  factor that
the government would have to reckon with in its entire home and foreign
policy. By leading the class struggle of the proletariat, developing
organisation and discipline among the workers, helping them to fight for
their immediate economic needs and to win position after position from
capital, by politically educating the workers and systematically and
unswervingly attacking the autocracy and making life a torment for every
tsarist bashi-bazouk who makes the proletariat feel the heavy paw of the
police government—such an organisation would at one and the same time be
a workers’ party organisation adapted to our conditions, and a powerful
revolutionary party directed against the autocracy. To discuss in
advance what methods this organisation will resort to in order to
deliver a smashing blow at the autocracy, whether, for example, it will
prefer insurrection, a mass political strike, or some other form of
attack, to discuss these things in advance and to decide this question
now would be empty doctrinairism. It would be akin to generals calling a
council of war before they had mustered their troops, mobilised them,
and under taken a campaign against the enemy. When the army of the
proletariat fights unswervingly and under the leader ship of a strong
Social-Democratic organisation for its economic and political
emancipation, that army will itself indicate the methods and means of
action to the generals. Then, and then only, will it be possible to
decide the question of striking the final blow at the autocracy; for the
solution of the problem depends on the state of the working-class
movement, on its breadth, on the methods of struggle developed by the
movement, on the qualities of the revolutionary organisation leading the
movement, on the attitude of other social elements to the proletariat
and to the autocracy, on the conditions governing home and foreign
politics—in a word, it depends on a thousand and one things which cannot
be guessed, and which it would be useless to try to guess in advance.

Thatis why the following argument of P. L. Lavrov’s is also extremely
unfair:

“If,however, they” (the Social-Democrats) “have, in one way or another,
not only to group the workers’ forces for the struggle against capital,
but also to rally revolutionary   individuals and groups for the
struggle against the autocracy, the Russian Social-Democrats will
_actually_ be adopting the programme of their opponents, the Narodnaya
Volya, no matter what they may call themselves. Differences of opinion
concerning the village community, the destiny of capitalism in Russia
and economic materialism are points of detail of very little importance
to the real cause, either facilitating or hindering the solution of
particular problems, particular methods of preparing the main points,
but nothing more” (p. 21, col. 1).

Itis strange to have to challenge this last proposition—that differences
of opinion on the fundamental questions of Russian life and of the
development of Russian society, on the fundamental problems of the
conception of history, concern only “points of detail”! It was said long
ago that without a revolutionary theory there can be no revolutionary
movement, and it is hardly necessary to advance proof of this truth _at
the present time_. The theory of the class struggle, the materialist
conception of Russian history and the materialist appraisal of the
present economic and political situation in Russia, recognition of the
need to relate the revolutionary struggle strictly to the definite
interests of a definite class and to analyse its relation to other
classes—to call these great revolutionary questions “points of detail”
is so colossally wrong and unexpected, coming from a veteran of
revolutionary _theory_, that we are almost prepared to regard this
passage as a lapsus. As for the first part of the tirade quoted, its
unfairness is still more astonishing. To state in print that the Russian
Social-Democrats only group the workers’ forces for the struggle against
capital (i.e., only for the economic struggle!) and do not rally
revolutionary individuals and groups for the struggle against the
autocracy, means that the author either does not know or does not want
to know generally known facts concerning the activities of the Russian
Social-Democrats. Or, perhaps, P. L. Lavrov does not regard the
Social-Democrats who are engaged in practical work in Russia as
“revolutionary individuals” and “revolutionary groups”?! Or (and this,
perhaps, is more likely) by “struggle” against the autocracy he means
only conspiracies against it? (Cf. p. 21, col. 2: “. . . it is a matter
of . . . organising a revolutionary _conspiracy_”;   our italics.)
Perhaps, in P. L. Lavrov’s opinion, those who do not organise political
conspiracies are not engaged in political struggle? We repeat once
again: opinions like these fully correspond to the old-time traditions
of the old-time Narodnaya Volya, but do not correspond at all either to
contemporary conceptions of the political struggle or to contemporary
conditions.

Wehave still to say a few words about the Narodopravtsi. P. L. Lavrov is
quite right, in our opinion, when he says that the Social-Democrats
“recommend the Narodopravtsi as being more frank, and are ready to
support them, without, however, merging with them” (p. 19, col. 2); he
should only have added: as more frank _democrats_, and _to the degree
that_ the Narodopravtsi act as consistent democrats. Unfortunately, this
condition is more a matter of the desired future than of the actual
present. The Narodopravtsi expressed a desire to free the democratic
tasks from Narodism and from the obsolete forms of “Russian socialism”
generally; but they themselves were still far from being freed from old
prejudices, and were far from consistent when they described their
party, exclusively a party for political reforms, as a “social
(??!)-revolutionary” party (see their “Manifesto” dated February 19,
1894), and declared in their “Manifesto” that “the term people’s rights
includes the organisation of people’s industry” (we are obliged to quote
from memory) and thus introduced Narodnik prejudices sub rosa. Hence, P.
L. Lavrov was, perhaps, not altogether wrong when he described them as
“masquerade politicians” (p. 20, col. 2). But perhaps it would be fairer
to regard the doctrine of Narodnoye Pravo as transitional, to the credit
of which it must be said that it was ashamed of the original character
of the Narodnik doctrines and openly gave battle to those most
abominable Narodnik reactionaries who, despite the existence of absolute
rule by the police and the upper class, have the audacity to speak of
the desirability of economic and not political reforms (see “An Urgent
Question,” published by the Narodnoye Pravo Party). If the Narodnoye
Pravo Party does not really contain anybody but ex-socialists who
conceal their socialist banner for tactical considerations, and who
merely don the mask of non-socialist politicians   (as P. L. Lavrov
assumes, p. 20, col. 2), then, of course, that party has no future
whatever. If, however, the party also contains not masquerade, but real
non-socialist politicians, non-socialist democrats, then this party can
do no little good by striving to draw closer to the political opposition
among our bourgeoisie, by striving to arouse the political consciousness
of our petty bourgeoisie, small shopkeepers, small artisans, etc.—the
class which, everywhere in Western Europe, played a part in the
democratic movement and, in Russia, has made exceptionally rapid
progress in cultural and other respects in the post-Reform period, and
which cannot avoid feeling the oppression of the police government that
gives its cynical support to the big factory owners, the magnates of
finance and industrial monopoly. All that is needed for this is that the
Narodopravtsi should make it their task to draw closer to various strata
of the population and should not confine themselves to the very same
“intelligentsia” whose impotence, owing to their isolation from the real
interests of the masses, is admitted even in “An Urgent Question.” What
is needed is that the Narodopravtsi abandon all idea of merging
different social elements and of pushing socialism aside in favour of
political tasks, that they abandon the false shame which prevents them
from drawing closer to the bourgeois strata of the population, i.e.,
that they not only talk about a programme for non-socialist politicians,
but act according to this programme, rousing and developing the
class-consciousness of those social groups and classes for whom
socialism is quite unnecessary, but who, as time goes on, increasingly
feel the oppression of the autocracy and the need for political liberty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

RussianSocial-Democracy is still very young. It is only just emerging
from its embryonic state in which theoretical questions predominated. It
is only just beginning to develop its practical activity. In place of
criticism of Social-Democratic theories and programmes, revolutionaries
of other parties have of necessity moved on to criticism of the
_practical activity_ of the Russian Social-Democrats. And it   must be
admitted that this latter criticism differs most sharply from the
criticism of theory, differs so much, in fact, that it was possible to
float the comical rumour that the St. Petersburg League of Struggle is
not a Social-Democratic organisation. The very fact that such a rumour
appeared shows how unfounded is the accusation now current that the
Social-Democrats ignore the political struggle. The very fact that such
a rumour appeared shows that many revolutionaries whom the
Social-Democrats’ _theory_ could not convince are beginning to be
convinced by their _practice_.

RussianSocial-Democracy is still faced with an enormous, almost
untouched field of work. The awakening of the Russian working class, its
spontaneous striving for knowledge, organisation, socialism, for the
struggle against its exploiters and oppressors becomes more widespread,
more strikingly apparent every day. The enormous progress made by
Russian capitalism in recent times is a guarantee that the working-class
movement will grow uninterruptedly in breadth and depth. We are
apparently now passing through the period in the capitalist cycle when
industry is “prospering,” when business is brisk, when the factories are
working at full capacity and when countless new factories, new
enterprises, joint-stock companies, railway enterprises, etc., etc., are
springing up like mushrooms. One need not be a prophet to foretell the
inevitable and fairly sharp crash that is bound to succeed this period
of industrial “prosperity.” This crash will ruin masses of small owners,
will throw masses of workers into the ranks of the unemployed, and will
thus confront all the workers in an acute form with the problems of
socialism and democracy which have long faced every class-conscious,
every thinking worker. Russian Social-Democrats must see to it that when
this crash comes the Russian proletariat is more class-conscious, more
united, able to understand the tasks of the Russian working class,
capable of putting up resistance to the capitalist class—which is now
reaping huge profits and always strives to burden the workers with the
losses—and capable of leading Russian democracy in a decisive struggle
against the police autocracy, which binds and fetters the Russian
workers and the whole of the Russian people.

Andso, to work, comrades! Let us not lose precious time! Russian
Social-Democrats have much to do to meet the requirements of the
awakening proletariat, to organise the working-class movement, to
strengthen the revolutionary groups and their mutual ties, to supply the
workers with propaganda and agitational literature, and to unite the
workers’ circles and Social-Democratic groups scattered all over Russia
into a single _Social-Democratic Labour Party!_

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

To the Workers and Socialists of St. Petersburg From the League of Struggle

TheSt. Petersburg revolutionaries are experiencing hard times. It seems
that the government has concentrated all its forces for the purpose of
crushing the recently born working-class movement which has given such a
display of strength. Arrests are being made on an unprecedented scale
and the prisons are overcrowded. Intellectuals, men and women, and
masses of workers are being dragged off and exiled. Almost every day
brings news of ever new victims of the police government, which has
flung itself in fury upon its enemies. The government has set itself the
aim of preventing the new trend in the Russian revolutionary movement
from gaining strength and getting on its feet. The public prosecutors
and gendarmes are already boasting that they have smashed the League of
Struggle.

Thisboast is a lie. The League of Struggle is intact, despite all the
persecution. With deep satisfaction we declare that the wholesale
arrests are doing their job—they are a powerful weapon of agitation
among the workers and socialist intellectuals, that the places of the
fallen revolutionaries are being taken by new people who are ready, with
fresh energy, to join the ranks of the champions of the Russian
proletariat and of the entire people of Russia. There can be no struggle
without sacrifice, and to the brutal persecution of the tsarist
bashi-bazouks we calmly reply: Revolutionaries have perished—long live
the revolution!

Sofar, increased persecution has only been able to cause a temporary
weakening of certain functions of the League of Struggle, a temporary
shortage of agents and agitators. This is the shortage that we now feel
and that impels us to call upon all class-conscious workers and all
intellectuals desirous of devoting their energies to the revolutionary
cause. The League of Struggle needs agents. Let all study circles and
all individuals desirous of working in any sphere of revolutionary
activity, even the most restricted, inform those in touch with the
League of Struggle. (Should any group be unable to contact such
individuals—this is very unlikely—they can do so through the League of
Russian Social-Democrats Abroad.) People are needed for all kinds of
work, and the more strictly revolutionaries specialise in the various
aspects of revolutionary activity, the more strictly they give thought
to their methods of underground work and ways of screening it, the more
selflessly they concentrate on the minor, unseen, particular jobs, the
safer will the whole thing be and the more difficult will it be for the
gendarmes and spies to discover the revolutionaries. In advance the
government has enmeshed not only the existing centres of anti-government
elements, but also possible and probable ones, in a network of agents.
The government is steadily developing the size and range of the
activities of those of its lackeys who are hounding revolutionaries, is
devising new methods, introducing more provocateurs, trying to exert
pressure on the arrested by means of intimidation, confrontation with
false testimony, forged signatures, planting faked letters, etc., etc.
Without a strengthening and development of revolutionary discipline,
organisation and underground activity, struggle against the government
is impossible. And underground activity demands above all that groups
and individuals specialise in different aspects of work and that the job
of co-ordination be assigned to the central group of the League of
Struggle, with as few members as possible. The aspects of revolutionary
work are extremely varied. Legal agitators are needed who can talk to
the workers in a way that _does not render_ them liable to prosecution,
and can say just _a_, leaving it to others to say _b_ and _c_.
Literature and leaflet distributors are needed. Organisers of workers’
study circles and groups are needed. Correspondents are needed who can
give a complete picture of events in all factories. People are needed
who will keep an eye on spies and provocateurs. People are needed who
will arrange underground meeting places. People are needed to deliver
literature, transmit instructions, and to arrange all kinds of contacts.
Fund collectors are needed. Agents are needed to work among the
intelligentsia and government officials, people in contact with the
workers and factory life, with the administration (with the police,
factory inspectors, etc.). People are needed for contact with the
different towns of Russia and other countries. People are needed to
arrange various ways of running off all sorts of literature. People are
needed to look after literature and other things, etc., etc. The smaller
and more specific the job undertaken by the individual person or
individual group, the greater will be the chance that they will think
things out, do the job properly and guarantee it best against failure,
that they will consider all the details of underground work and use all
possible means of hoodwinking and misleading the gendarmes, the more
will success be assured, the harder will it be for the police and
gendarmes to keep track of the revolutionaries and their links with
their organisations, and the easier for the revolutionary party to
replace, without prejudice to the cause as a whole, agents and members
who have fallen. We know that specialisation of this kind is a very
difficult matter, difficult because it demands from the individual the
greatest endurance and selflessness, demands the giving of all one’s
strength to work that is inconspicuous, monotonous, that deprives one of
contact with comrades and subordinates the revolutionary’s entire life
to a grim and rigid routine. But it was only in conditions such as these
that the greatest men of revolutionary practice in Russia succeeded in
carrying out the boldest undertakings, spending years on all-round
preparation, and we are profoundly convinced that the Social-Democrats
will prove no less self-sacrificing than the revolutionaries of previous
generations. We are also aware that the preliminary period envisaged by
our system during which the League of Struggle will collect the
necessary information about individuals or groups offering their
services and give them something to do by way of trial will be a very  
difficult one for many people eager to devote their energies to
revolutionary work. But without this preliminary testing, revolutionary
activity in present-day Russia is impossible.

Insuggesting this system of work to our new comrades we are expressing a
view arrived at after long experience, being deeply convinced that it
best of all guarantees successful revolutionary work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] P. L. Lavrov’s article in No. 4 is, in fact, only an “excerpt” from
a long letter written by him for _Material_.^([11]) We have heard that
the full text of this letter and a reply by Plekhanov were also
published abroad this summer (1897) but we have seen neither the one nor
the other. Nor do we know whether _Leaflet of the Narodnaya Volya
Group_, No. 5, in which the editors promised to publish an editorial
article on P. L. Lavrov’s letter, has appeared yet. See No. 4, p. 22,
col. 1, footnote. —_Lenin_

[2] Our italics. —_Lenin_

[3] Our italics. [DUPLICATE "*"] —_Lenin_

[4] The pamphlet _The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats_ was written
by Lenin in exile (Siberia) at the close of 1897, and was first
published in 1898 by the Emancipation of Labour group in Geneva. It
circulated widely among Russia’s advanced workers. According to Police
Department data for the years 1898-1905, copies of the pamphlet were
discovered during searches and arrests made in St. Petersburg, Moscow,
Smolensk, Kazan, Orel, Kiev, Vilno, Feodosia, Irkutsk, Archangel,
Sormovo, Kovno and other towns.

Theoriginal manuscript of the pamphlet has not been found but there is a
copy made by some unknown hand. In 1902 a second edition of it appeared
in Geneva, and in 1905 a third edition each with a preface by V. I.
Lenin. The pamphlet was also included in the miscellany: VI. Ilyin,
_Twelve Years_, published in November 1907 (the cover and title-page of
which are dated 1908). The 1902, 1905 and 1907 editions do not contain
the leaflet “To the St. Petersburg Workers and Socialists from the
League of Struggle” included in the copy of the manuscript, and as a
supplement to the first edition of the pamphlet. The leaflet was
published in all the previous editions of the _Collected Works_ and is
also included in the present edition. The copy made from the manuscript
contains several slips of the pen. Inaccuracies also appeared in the
first edition of the pamphlet, which was published abroad by the
Emancipation of Labour group, but these were corrected by Lenin in the
subsequent editions.

[5] _Narodnoye Pravo_ (_People’s Right_ )—an illegal organisation of
Russian democratic intellectuals founded in the summer of 1893, its
illitiators including O. V. Aptekman, A. I. Bogdanovich A. V.
Gedeonovsky, M. A. Natanson, and N. S. Tyutchev who had formerly
belonged to the Narodnaya Volya. The Narodopravtsi, as the members of
the party were called, set themselves the aim of uniting all opposition
forces to fight for political reforms. Their organisation issued two
programme documents, “Manifesto “ and “An Urgent Question.” In the
spring of 1894 the group was broken up by the tsarist government.
Lenin’s estimation of the Narodnoye Pravo as a political party will be
found in his _What the “Friends of the People” Are and How They Fight
the Social-Democrats_ (see present edition, Vol. 1) and on page 344 of
the present volume. Most of the Narodopravtsi subsequently joined the
Socialist-Revolutionary Party.

[6] The _Narodnaya Volya_ (_People’s Will_ ) group (Narodovoltsi) came
into existence In St. Petersburg in the autumn of 1891 with its own
programme. Its original membership included M. S. Olminsky (Alexandrov),
  N . L. Meshcheryakov, Y. M. Alexandrova, A. A. Fedulov, and A. A.
Yergin. Pamphlets and _Rabochy Sbornik_ (_Workers’ Miscellany_ ) and two
issues of _Letuchy Listok_ (_The Leaflet_ ) were published illegally by
the group’s press. In April 1894 the group was broken up by the police,
but soon renewed its activities. At that period it was in process of
abandoning Narodnaya Volya views for Social-Democracy. The last issue of
_Letuchy Listok_, No. 4, that appeared in December 1895, clearly bore
traces of Social-Democratic influence. The group established contact
with the St. Petersburg League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the
Working Class, used its press to issue several of the League’s
publications, for example, Lenin’s Explanation of the Law on Fines
Imposed on Factory Workers (see pp. 29-72 of the present volume), and
negotiated with the League about the joint publication of the newspaper
_Rabocheye Dyelo_. It was intended to use the group’s press to issue
Lenin’s pamphlet _On Strikes_, which was smuggled out of prison in May
1896. But the suggestion fell through in view of the police discovery
and destruction of the press, and the arrest of members of the group in
June 1896. The group then went out of existence, and some of its members
(P. F. Kudelli, N. L. Meshcheryakov, M. S. Olminsky, and others) later
became active figures in the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party,
although the majority joined the Socialist-Revolutionary Party.

[7] The _League of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad_ was founded in 1894
in Geneva, on the initiative of the Emancipation of Labour group, and
had its own press where it printed revolutionary literature. At first
the Emancipation of Labour group guided the League and edited its
publications. The League issued the _Rabotnik_ miscellanies and the
_Listki_ “_Rabotnika_,” and published Lenin’s _Explanation of the Law on
Fines Imposed on Factory Workers_ (1897), Plekhanov’s _New Drive Against
Russian Social-Democracy_ (1897), etc. The First Congress of the
R.S.D.L.P., held in March 1898, recognised the League as the Party’s
representative abroad. As time proceeded the opportunist elements—the
“economists,” or so-called “young’ group, secured the upper hand in the
League. At the First Congress of the League held in Zurich in November
1898, the Emancipation of Labour group announced their refusal to edit
League publications, with the exception of No. 5-6 of _Rabotnik_ and
Lenin’s pamphlets _The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats_ and _The
New Factory Law_, which the group undertook to publish. From then on the
League published _Rabocheye Dyelo_, a magazine of the “economists.” The
Emancipation of Labour group finally broke with the League and left its
ranks in April 1900, at the League’s Second Congress held in Geneva,
when the Emancipation of Labour group and its supporters left the
Congress and established an independent _Sotsial-Demokrat_ organisation.
In 1903 the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. adopted a decision to
disband the League.

[8] This passage refers to the policy pursued by N. P. Ignatyev,
Minister of Internal Affairs in 1881-82, which was intended, as Lenin
put it, “to bamboozle” the liberals; by playing at democracy it was
hoped to hide the fact that the government of Alexander III had gone
over entirely to the side of reaction. Part of the policy was the
calling of conferences of “knowledgeable people” which included Marshals
of the Nobility, representatives of the Zemstvo Administrations and
similar people to discuss problems relating to a reduction in land
redemption payments, the proper organisation of migration, and local
government reform. A suggestion was even made to convene a so-called
Zemsky Sobor, to be attended by a crowd of three thousand strong. All
these devices, however, ended in Ignatyev’s resignation, followed by a
period of “unbridled, incredibly senseless and brutal reaction” (see
_What the “Friends of the People” Are and How They Fight the
Social-Democrats_, present edition, Vol. 1).

[9] _The Emancipation of Labour group_ was the first Russian Marxist
group. It was founded in Geneva by G. V. Plekhanov in 1883, and included
P. B. Axelrod, L. G. Deutsch, Vera Zasulich, and V. N. Ignatov.

Thegroup did much to spread Marxism in Russia. It translated such
Marxist works as _Manifesto of the Communist Party_ by Marx and Engels,
_Wage-Labour and Capital_ by Marx, and _Socialism: Utopian and
Scientific_, by Engels, etc., published them abroad and organised their
distribution in Russia. Plekhanov and his group seriously undermined
Narodism. In 1883 Plekhanov drafted a programme for the Russian
Social-Democrats and in 1885 made another draft. The two drafts were
published by the Emancipation of Labour group and marked an important
step towards the establishment of a Social-Democratic Party in Russia.
Plekhanov’s _Socialism and the Political Struggle_ (1883), _Our
Differences_ (1885), _The Development of the Monist View of History_
(1895) played a considerable part in disseminating Marxist views. The
group, however, made some serious mistakes. It clung to remnants of
Narodnik views, underestimated the revolutionary role of the peasantry,
and overestimated the part played by the liberal bourgeoisie. These
errors were the germs of the future Menshevik views held by Plekhanov
and other members of the group. The group played a great part in imbuing
the Russian working class with revolutionary class-consciousness but it
had no practical ties with the working-class movement. Lenin pointed out
that the Emancipation of Labour group “only theoretically founded the
Social-Democracy and took the first step in the direction of the
working-class movement.” The group established ties with the
international labour movement, and represented Russian Social-Democracy
at all congresses of the Second International from the first held in
Paris in 1889 onwards.

Atthe Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P held in August 1903, the
Emancipation of Labour group announced its dissolution.

[11] Lenin refers to collections of articles entitled Material for a
History of the Russian Social-Revolutionary Movement, published in
Geneva in the years 1893-96 by the Group of Old Narodnaya Volya Members
(P. L. Lavrov, N. S. Rusanov, and others). In all, four collections
appeared in five volumes (seventeen were originally planned).

[10] _Blanquism_—a trend in the French socialist movement headed by the
outstanding revolutionary and prominent representative of French utopian
communism, Louis-Auguste Blanqui (1805-81).

TheBlanquists denied the class struggle, and awaited “mankind’s
emancipation from wage slavery by a conspiracy of a small minority of
intellectuals and not by the class struggle of the proletariat” (V. I.
Lenin, _Results of the Congress_. See present edition, Vol. 10). They
did not take account of the concrete situation requisite for the victory
of an uprising and showed their disdain for ties with the masses,
substituting the actions of a clandestine handful of conspirators for
the activity of a revolutionary party.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
